AP U.S. GOVERNMENT
AND POLITICS
UNIT 1
Foundations
of American
Democracy
15–22%
AP EXAM WEIGHTING
~16/~8
CLASS PERIODS
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 33
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

Remember to go to AP Classroom
to assign students the online
Progress Check for this unit.
Whether assigned as homework
or completed in class, the Progress
Check provides each student with
immediate feedback related to this
unit’s topics and skills.
Progress Check 1
Multiple-choice: ~20 questions
Free-response: 3 questions
§
Concept Application
§
Argument Essay (partial)
§
Argument Essay (partial)
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 34
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 15–22% ~16/~8
AP EXAM WEIGHTING CLASS PERIODS
Foundations of
American Democracy
Developing Understanding
BIG IDEA 1
More than 200 years after the U.S. Constitution was ratified, the compromises that were
Constitutionalism
necessary for ratification—which in some instances led to ambiguity—continue to fuel debate
§
Why are there debates and discussion over how best to protect liberty, equality, order, and private property. This
about the balance first unit sets the foundation for the course by examining how the framers of the Constitution
of power between set up a structure of government intended to stand the test of time. Compromises were
the federal and state made during the Constitutional Convention and ratification debates, and these compromises
governments? focused on the proper balance between individual freedom, social order, and equality of
opportunity. In subsequent units, students will apply their understanding of the Constitution
BIG IDEA 2
to the institutions of government and people’s daily lives.
Liberty and Order
§ Building the Course Skills
Is the Bill of Rights claim is the strongest because . . .”, which is
necessary? Why then followed by specific relevant evidence.
4.A 4.B 5.A 5.B
or why not? Evidence is relevant when it relates to and
In the study of government and political supports the claim.
BIG IDEA 4
science, text-based qualitative sources
Competing Preparing for the AP Exam
help political scientists understand how
Policymaking
governmental and political institutions and
Interests
actors function and the reasons for their The AP U.S. Government and Politics course
§
How does the behaviors. These sources are often actually requires students to apply their knowledge
Constitution affect arguments about what the government does in a variety of contexts and to real-world
you and the choices (or should do) and how these actions impact scenarios. It’s not enough for students to
you make? citizens and other people in the country. know the definition of governmental terms
and concepts. On the AP Exam, they will be
In this course, students also learn to write
asked to show a deeper understanding of
their own arguments. Their arguments should
how these concepts actually work, often by
establish a line of reasoning that will serve
describing and explaining an interaction or
as the organizing principle for the essay and
application within a given scenario on both
that will support the essay’s purpose (e.g., to
multiple-choice and free-response questions.
explain similarities and differences among
political principles or to explain political Students often struggle with explanations.
processes). They may define or describe a concept but
not fully explain the how or why in the context
In their arguments, students should write
of the question. Have students practice by
claims that take a position, going beyond
asking them to explain the steps, stages,
simply stating facts. Claims should also
and interactions of processes; explain
include additional information that sets
and link causes and effects; or explain the
up the evidence. This is usually developed
significance of similarities and differences.
through a “because” statement, as in “My
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 35
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
UNIT AT A GLANCE
Topic Suggested Skill
1.1 Ideals of Democracy 1.D
Describe political principles, institutions, processes, policies, and
behaviors illustrated in different scenarios in context.
1.2 Types of Democracy 4.A
Describe the argument, perspective, evidence, and reasoning
presented in the source.
1.3 G overnment Power and Individual 1.A
Describe political principles, institutions, processes, policies, and
Rights
behaviors.
1.4 C hallenges of the Articles of 4.B
Explain how the argument or perspective in the source relates to
Confederation
political principles, institutions, processes, policies, and behaviors.
1.5 R atification of the U.S. Constitution 1.E
Explain how political principles, institutions, processes, policies,
and behaviors apply to different scenarios in context.
1.6 P rinciples of American Government 4.B
Explain how the argument or perspective in the source relates to
political principles, institutions, processes, policies, and behaviors.
1.7 R elationship Between the States and 5.A
Articulate a defensible claim/thesis.
National Government
1.8 C onstitutional Interpretations of 2.A
Describe the facts, issue, holding, reasoning, decision, and majority
Federalism
opinion of required Supreme Court cases.
1.9 Federalism in Action 5.B
Support an argument or claim/thesis using relevant evidence.
Go to AP Classroom to assign the Progress Check for Unit 1.
Review the results in class to identify and address any student misunderstandings.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 36
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
SAMPLE INSTRUCTIONAL ACTIVITIES
The sample activities on this page are optional and are offered to provide possible ways to
incorporate various instructional approaches into the classroom. Teachers do not need to use
these activities or instructional approaches and are free to alter or edit them. The examples
below were developed in partnership with teachers from the AP community to share ways
that they approach teaching the content and skills in this unit. Please refer to the Instructional
Approaches section beginning on p. 141 for more examples of activities and strategies.
Activity Topic Sample Activity
1
1.2 and Close Reading
1.3 When students are reading the required foundational documents, such as Federalist
No. 10 and Brutus No. 1, have them highlight relevant words and passages that support the
authors’ claims. Ask students to connect ideas outlined in the documents to the Federalist
and Antifederalist views of how our government was founded.
2
1.3 and Think-Pair-Share
1.6 Give students a question that requires them to connect Madison’s argument in
Federalist No. 51 to a) the structure of the three branches of government established in the
Constitution and b) his argument about factions in Federalist No. 10.
3
1.8 Case Notes
Have students create case notes for McCulloch v. Maryland and United States v. Lopez that
include the following information: facts of the case, majority opinion, and the reasoning
(constitutional question) for the majority opinion. Make sure students focus on the
constitutional reasoning behind the Court’s decision.
4
1.9 Making Connections
Write concepts related to one of the course big ideas on index cards, place them in a box,
and have students pick a card at random. Give students a few minutes to gather and recall
information about the term, and then pair students and ask them to find the connection
between their concepts. Finally, ask the pairs to write a brief explanation of how the
concepts are related.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 37
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
SUGGESTED SKILL TOPIC 1.1
Concept Application
Ideals of
1.D
Describe political principles,
institutions, processes, Democracy
policies, and behaviors
illustrated in different
scenarios in context.
OPTIONAL READINGS AND Required Course Content
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
(NOT REQUIRED)
§
Thomas Hobbes’s
definition of an anarchic
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
“state of nature” in the
absence of government,
LO 1.1.A EK 1.1.A.1
as in the failed state
of Somalia Explain how democratic The U.S. government is based on the following
§
The Mayflower ideals are reflected in the democratic ideals:
Compact (1620) Declaration of Independence
i. Natural rights (all people have certain
§ John Locke’s Second and the U.S. Constitution. rights that cannot be taken away)
Treatise of Civil
ii. A social contract (an implicit agreement
Government (1690)
§ among the people in a society to give up
Baron de Montesquieu’s
some freedoms to maintain social order)
ideas about separating
powers in government iii. Popular sovereignty (all government power
found in The Spirit of comes from the consent of its people)
the Laws (1748) iv. Limited government (a government’s
AVAILABLE RESOURCE power cannot be absolute)
§ Classroom Resources > EK 1.1.A.2
Analytical Reading
The ideal of limited government is ensured by
(Declaration of
the interaction of these principles:
Independence)
i. Separation of powers
ii. Checks and balances
iii. Federalism
iv. Republicanism
EK 1.1.A.3
The Declaration of Independence, drafted by
Thomas Jefferson (with help from Adams and
Franklin), restates the philosophy of natural
rights, and provides a foundation for popular
sovereignty. The U.S. Constitution, drafted
by James Madison at the Constitutional
Convention in Philadelphia that was led
by George Washington (with important
contributions from Hamilton and members
of the “Grand Committee”), is an example of
a social contract and establishes a system of
limited government. The Constitution provides
the blueprint for a unique form of democratic
government in the United States.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 38
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
TOPIC 1.2 SUGGESTED SKILL
Source Analysis
Types of
4.A
Describe the argument,
Democracy perspective, evidence, and
reasoning presented in the
source.
Required Course Content
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
LO 1.2.A EK 1.2.A.1
Explain how models of Representative democracies can take several
representative democracy forms including the following models:
are visible in major
i. Participatory democracy, which
institutions, policies, events,
emphasizes broad participation in politics
or debates in the U.S.
and civil society
ii. Pluralist democracy, which emphasizes
group-based activism by nongovernmental
interests striving for impact on political
decision making
iii. Elite democracy, which emphasizes limited
participation in politics and civil society
EK 1.2.A.2
Different aspects of the U.S. Constitution as
well as the debate between Federalist No. 10
and Brutus No. 1 reflect the tension between
the broad participatory model and the more
filtered participation of the pluralist and elite
models of representative democracy.
EK 1.2.A.3
The three models of representative democracy
continue to be reflected in contemporary
institutions and political behavior.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 39
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
SUGGESTED SKILL TOPIC 1.3
Concept Application
Government Power
1.A
Describe political principles,
institutions, processes, and Individual Rights
policies, and behaviors.
OPTIONAL READING Required Course Content
§
“Letters from the
Federal Farmer #1”
(Anti-Federalist
publication)
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
AVAILABLE RESOURCES
§ LO 1.3.A EK 1.3.A.1
Classroom Resources >
Analytical Reading Explain Federalist and Anti- Federalists supported ratification of the
(Federalist No. 10 and Federalist views on central Constitution and a strong central government.
Brutus No. 1)
government and democracy. Madison’s arguments in Federalist No. 10
§
Professional focused on the superiority of a large republic
Development > in controlling the “mischiefs of faction,”
Teaching and delegating authority to elected representatives
Assessing Module—
and dispersing power between the states and
Unit 1: Source Analysis
national government.
and Argumentation
EK 1.3.A.2
Anti-Federalists opposed the ratification of the
Constitution and wanted more power reserved
to state governments rather than a strong
central government. Anti-Federalist writings,
including Brutus No. 1, adhered to popular
democratic theory that emphasized the
benefits of a small, decentralized republic while
warning of the dangers to personal liberty from
a large, centralized government.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 40
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
TOPIC 1.4 SUGGESTED SKILL
Source Analysis
Challenges of
4.B
Explain how the argument
the Articles of or perspective in the source
relates to political principles,
institutions, processes,
Confederation policies, and behaviors.
Required Course Content ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
(NOT REQUIRED)
§
State constitutions
during the
postcolonial period
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
AVAILABLE RESOURCE
LO 1.4.A EK 1.4.A.1 §
Classroom Resources >
Analytical Reading
Explain the relationship Specific incidents and legal challenges that
(Articles of
between key provisions of highlighted key weaknesses of the Articles of
Confederation)
the Articles of Confederation, Confederation are represented by the:
and the debate over granting
i. Lack of centralized military power to
the federal government
address Shays’ Rebellion
greater power formerly
ii. Lack of an executive branch to enforce
reserved to the states.
laws, including taxation
iii. Lack of a national court system
iv. Lack of power to regulate interstate
commerce
v. Lack of the exclusive power to coin money
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 41
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
SUGGESTED SKILL TOPIC 1.5
Concept Application
Ratification of the
1.E
Explain how political
principles, institutions, U.S. Constitution
processes, policies, and
behaviors apply to different
scenarios in context.
Required Course Content
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
LO 1.5.A EK 1.5.A.1
Explain the impact of Compromises deemed necessary for
political negotiation ratification of the Constitution included the
and compromise at the following:
Constitutional Convention
i. Great (Connecticut) Compromise, which
on the development of the
created a dual (bicameral) system of
constitutional system.
congressional representation with the
House of Representatives based on
each state’s population and the Senate
representing each state equally
ii. Electoral College, which created a system
for electing the president by electors from
each state rather than by popular vote or
by congressional vote
iii. Three-Fifths Compromise, which provided
a formula for calculating a state’s enslaved
population for purposes of representation
in the House and for taxation
iv. Postponing until 1808 a decision whether
to ban the importation of enslaved persons
v. Agreement to add a Bill of Rights to
address concerns of the Anti-Federalists
EK 1.5.A.2
Debates about self-government during the
drafting of the Constitution necessitated the
drafting of an amendment process in Article
V that entailed either a two-thirds vote in
both houses or a proposal from two-thirds
of the state legislatures, with final ratification
determined by three-fourths of the states.
continued on next page
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 42
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
LO 1.5.A EK 1.5.A.3
Explain the impact of The compromises necessary to secure
political negotiation ratification of the Constitution left some
and compromise at the matters unresolved that continue to generate
Constitutional Convention discussion and debate today.
on the development of the EK 1.5.A.4
constitutional system.
The debate over the role of the national
government, the powers of state governments,
and the rights of individuals remains at the
heart of present-day constitutional issues
about democracy and governmental power, as
represented by:
i. Debates about government surveillance
resulting from the federal government’s
response to the 9/11 attacks
ii. Debates about the role of government in
public school education
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 43
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
SUGGESTED SKILL TOPIC 1.6
Source Analysis
Principles of
4.B
Explain how the argument
or perspective in the American Government
source relates to political
principles, institutions,
processes, policies, and
behaviors.
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES Required Course Content
(NOT REQUIRED)
§
Religious Freedom
Restoration Act of 1993
§
Impeachment LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
proceedings against
Presidents Andrew LO 1.6.A EK 1.6.A.1
Johnson, Richard Nixon,
Explain the constitutional The specific and separate powers delegated to
and Bill Clinton
§ principles of separation of Congress, the president, and the courts allow
Congressional
powers and checks and each branch to check and balance the power
response to the Obama
balances. of the other branches, ensuring no one branch
administration’s
becomes too powerful.
executive actions on
immigration EK 1.6.A.2
AVAILABLE RESOURCE
Federalist No. 51 explains how constitutional
§
Classroom Resources > provisions of separation of powers and checks
Analytical Reading and balances control potential abuses by
(Federalist No. 51) majorities.
LO 1.6.B EK 1.6.B.1
Explain the effects of Separation of powers and checks and balances
separation of powers and creates multiple access points for stakeholders
checks and balances for the and institutions to influence public policy.
U.S. political system. EK 1.6.B.2
Checks and balances and separation of powers
allow legal actions to be taken against public
officials deemed to have abused their power.
Those legal actions include the process of
impeachment (the House formally charges an
official with abuse of power or misconduct) and
removal (if the official is convicted in a Senate
impeachment trial).
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 44
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
TOPIC 1.7 SUGGESTED SKILL
Argumentation
Relationship Between
5.A
Articulate a defensible
the States and claim/thesis.
National Government
Required Course Content ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
(NOT REQUIRED)
§
National Recovery Act
of 1933
§
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE Devolution revolution of
the 1980s
LO 1.7.A EK 1.7.A.1 §
Federal response to
natural disasters such
Explain how the Federalism is the system of government in
as Hurricanes Katrina
constitutional allocation of the United States in which power is shared
and Sandy
power between the national between the national and state governments.
§
National Minimum
and state governments The exclusive and concurrent powers of the
Drinking Age Act
affects society. national and state governments help explain
of 1984
the ongoing debate over the balance of power
§
between the two levels. State-level legalization
of marijuana for
EK 1.7.A.2
personal use as
Exclusive power is held by only one level of in Colorado and
government and includes enumerated powers Washington (2012)
that are written in the Constitution, and implied AVAILABLE RESOURCES
powers that are not specifically written in §
Classroom Resources >
the Constitution but are inferred from the
◆ Federalism, the
Necessary and Proper Clause.
Commerce Clause,
EK 1.7.A.3
and the Tenth
Amendment
Reserved powers are those not delegated or
enumerated to the national government but are
reserved to the states, as stated in the Tenth
Amendment.
EK 1.7.A.4
Concurrent powers are shared between both
levels of government such as the power to
collect taxes, the power to make and enforce
laws and the power to build roads.
EK 1.7.A.5
The distribution of power between national and
state governments is demonstrated by:
i. Revenue sharing (national funding with
almost no restrictions to the states on its
use and is the least used form of funding)
continued on next page
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 45
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
LO 1.7.A
ii. Block grants (national funding with minimal
Explain how the restrictions to the states on its use and is
constitutional allocation of preferred by the states)
power between the national iii. Categorical grants (national funding that
and state governments is restricted to specific categories of
affects society. expenditures, is preferred by the national
government, and is the most commonly
used form of funding)
iv. Mandates (requirements by the national
government of the states)
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 4466
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
Foundations of American Democracy 1
TOPIC 1.8 SUGGESTED SKILL
SCOTUS
Constitutional Application
2.A
Interpretations Describe the facts,
issue, holding, reasoning,
decision, and majority
of Federalism opinion of required
Supreme Court cases.
Required Course Content OPTIONAL READINGS AND
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
(NOT REQUIRED)
§
Daniel Elazar, “Opening
the Third Century of
LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
American Federalism:
Issues and Prospects,”
LO 1.8.A EK 1.8.A.1
Annals of the American
Explain how the balance The Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses Academy of Political
of power between national of the Fourteenth Amendment give the national and Social Science
and state governments has government the power to enforce protections (1990)
§
changed over time based for any person against the states, but Supreme New Deal legislation
§
on interpretations of the Court interpretations can influence the extent Defense of Marriage
Supreme Court of the United of those protections. Act of 1996 and state
States. EK 1.8.A.2 marriage laws
§
No Child Left Behind Act
The Commerce Clause gives the national
of 2001
government the power to regulate interstate
§
commerce, but Supreme Court interpretations Violence Against
Women Act of 1994
can influence the extent of this power.
and United States v.
EK 1.8.A.3
Morrison (2000)
The Necessary and Proper Clause gives AVAILABLE RESOURCES
Congress the power to make laws related §
Classroom Resources >
to carrying out its enumerated powers, but
◆ Analytical Reading
Supreme Court interpretations can influence
(The Tenth
the extent of these powers.
Amendment to the
EK 1.8.A.4
United States)
The Supremacy Clause gives the national ◆ Federalism, the
government and its laws general precedence Commerce Clause,
over states’ laws, but Supreme Court and the Tenth
interpretations may affect when specific Amendment
actions exceed this constitutional power.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 47
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd

UNIT
1 Foundations of American Democracy
SUGGESTED SKILL TOPIC 1.9
Argumentation
Federalism in Action
5.B
Support an argument or
claim/thesis using relevant
evidence.
AVAILABLE RESOURCES Required Course Content
§
Classroom Resources >
◆ Federalism,
the Commerce
Clause, and the LEARNING OBJECTIVE ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
Tenth Amendment
LO 1.9.A EK 1.9.A.1
Explain how the distribution The allocation of powers between national and
of powers between national state governments creates multiple access
and state governments points for stakeholders and institutions to
impacts policymaking. influence public policy.
EK 1.9.A.2
National policymaking is constrained by the
sharing of concurrent powers with state
governments.
AAPP UU..SS.. GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt aanndd PPoolliittiiccss CCoouurrssee aanndd EExxaamm DDeessccrriippttiioonn CCoouurrssee FFrraammeewwoorrkk VV..11 || 4488
RReettuurrnn ttoo TTaabbllee ooff CCoonntteennttss
©© 22002233 CCoolllleeggee BBooaarrdd