=== SECONDARY RELATIONSHIPS AND SEX EDUCATION CURRICULUM CONTENT ===

Secondary relationships and sex education curriculum
content
Schools should continue to develop knowledge of topics specified for primary as
required and in addition cover the following content by the end of secondary:
Families
Curriculum content:
1. That there are different types of committed, stable relationships.
2. How these relationships might contribute to wellbeing, and their importance for bringing
up children.
3. Why marriage or civil partnership is an important relationship choice for many couples.
The legal status of marriage and civil partnership, including that they carry legal rights,
benefits and protections that are not available to couples who are cohabiting or who
have, for example, undergone a non-legally binding religious ceremony.
4. That ‘common-law marriage’ is a myth and cohabitants do not obtain marriage-like status
or rights from living together or by having children.
5. That forced marriage and marrying before the age of 18 are illegal.8
6. How families and relationships change over time, including through birth, death,
separation and new relationships.
7. The roles and responsibilities of parents with respect to raising children, including the
characteristics of successful parenting and the importance of the early years of a child’s
life for brain development.
8. How to judge when a relationship is unsafe and where to seek help when needed,
including when pupils are concerned about violence, harm, or when they are unsure who
to trust.
8 Age of Marriage Act 2023
13

Respectful relationships
Curriculum content:
1. The characteristics of positive relationships of all kinds, online and offline, including
romantic relationships. For example, pupils should understand the role of consent, trust,
mutual respect, honesty, kindness, loyalty, shared interests and outlooks, generosity,
boundaries, tolerance, privacy, and the management of conflict, reconciliation and
ending relationships.
2. How to evaluate their impact on other people and treat others with kindness and
respect, including in public spaces and including strangers. Pupils should understand
the legal rights and responsibilities regarding equality, and that everyone is unique and
equal.
3. The importance of self-esteem, independence and having a positive relationship with
oneself, and how these characteristics support healthy relationships with others. This
includes developing one’s own interests, hobbies, friendship groups, and skills. Pupils
should understand what it means to be treated with respect by others.
4. What tolerance requires, including the importance of tolerance of other people’s beliefs.
5. The practical steps pupils can take and skills they can develop to support respectful and
kind relationships. This includes skills for communicating respectfully within
relationships and with strangers, including in situations of conflict.
6. The different types of bullying (including online bullying), the impact of bullying, the
responsibilities of bystanders to report bullying and how and where to get help.
7. Skills for ending relationships or friendships with kindness and managing the difficult
feelings that endings might bring, including disappointment, hurt or frustration.
8. The role of consent, including in romantic and sexual relationships. Pupils should
understand that ethical behaviour goes beyond consent and involves kindness, care,
attention to the needs and vulnerabilities of the other person, as well as an awareness
of power dynamics. Pupils should understand that just because someone says yes to
doing something, that doesn’t automatically make it ethically ok.
9. How stereotypes, in particular stereotypes based on sex, gender reassignment, race,
religion, sexual orientation or disability, can cause damage (e.g. how they might
normalise non-consensual behaviour or encourage prejudice). Pupils should be
equipped to recognise misogyny and other forms of prejudice.
10. How inequalities of power can impact behaviour within relationships, including sexual
relationships. For example, how people who are disempowered can feel they are not
entitled to be treated with respect by others or how those who enjoy an unequal amount
of power might, with or without realising it, impose their preferences on others.
11. How pornography can negatively influence sexual attitudes and behaviours, including
by normalising harmful sexual behaviours and by disempowering some people,
especially women, to feel a sense of autonomy over their own body and providing some
people with a sense of sexual entitlement to the bodies of others.
12. Pupils should have an opportunity to discuss how some sub-cultures might influence
our understanding of sexual ethics, including the sexual norms endorsed by so-called
“involuntary celibates” (incels) or online influencers.
14

Online safety and awareness
Curriculum content:
1. Rights, responsibilities and opportunities online, including that the same expectations of
behaviour apply in all contexts, including online.
2. Online risks, including the importance of being cautious about sharing personal
information online and of using privacy and location settings appropriately to protect
information online. Pupils should also understand the difference between public and
private online spaces and related safety issues.
3. The characteristics of social media, including that some social media accounts are fake,
and / or may post things which aren’t real / have been created with AI. That social
media users may say things in more extreme ways than they might in face-to-face
situations, and that some users present highly exaggerated or idealised profiles of
themselves online.
4. Not to provide material to others that they would not want to be distributed further and
not to pass on personal material which is sent to them. Pupils should understand that
any material provided online might be circulated, and that once this has happened there
is no way of controlling where it ends up. Pupils should understand the serious risks of
sending material to others, including the law concerning the sharing of images.
5. That keeping or forwarding indecent or sexual images of someone under 18 is a crime,
even if the photo is of themselves or of someone who has consented, and even if the
image was created by the child and/or using AI generated imagery. Pupils should
understand the potentially serious consequences of acquiring or generating indecent or
sexual images of someone under 18, including the potential for criminal charges and
severe penalties including imprisonment. Pupils should know how to seek support and
should understand that they will not be in trouble for asking for help, either at school or
with the police, if an image of themselves has been shared. Pupils should also
understand that sharing indecent images of people over 18 without consent is a crime.
6. What to do and how to report when they are concerned about material that has been
circulated, including personal information, images or videos, and how to manage issues
online.9
7. About the prevalence of deepfakes including videos and photos, how deepfakes can be
used maliciously as well as for entertainment, the harms that can be caused by
deepfakes and how to identify them.
8. That the internet contains inappropriate and upsetting content, some of which is illegal,
including unacceptable content that encourages misogyny, violence or use of weapons.
Pupils should be taught where to go for advice and support about something they have
seen online. Pupils should understand that online content can present a distorted
picture of the world and normalise or glamorise behaviours which are unhealthy and
wrong.
9. That social media can lead to escalations in conflicts, how to avoid these escalations
and where to go for help and advice.
10. How to identify when technology and social media is used as part of bullying,
harassment, stalking, coercive and controlling behaviour, and other forms of abusive
and/or illegal behaviour and how to seek support about concerns.
9 For example, see Report Remove
15

11. That pornography, and other online content, often presents a distorted picture of people
and their sexual behaviours and can negatively affect how people behave towards
sexual partners. This can affect pupils who see pornographic content accidentally as
well as those who see it deliberately. Pornography can also portray misogynistic
behaviours and attitudes which can negatively influence those who see it.
12. How information and data is generated, collected, shared and used online.
13. That websites may share personal data about their users, and information collected on
their internet use, for commercial purposes (e.g. to enable targeted advertising).
14. That criminals can operate online scams, for example using fake websites or emails to
extort money or valuable personal information. This information can be used to the
detriment of the person or wider society. About risks of sextortion, how to identify online
scams relating to sex, and how to seek support if they have been scammed or involved
in sextortion.
15. That AI chatbots are an example of how AI is rapidly developing, and that these can
pose risks by creating fake intimacy or offering harmful advice. It is important to be able
to critically think about new types of technology as they appear online and how they
might pose a risk.
16

Being Safe
Curriculum content:
1. How to recognise, respect and communicate consent and boundaries in relationships,
including in early romantic relationships (in all contexts, including online) and early
sexual relationships that might involve kissing or touching. That kindness and care for
others requires more than just consent.
2. That there are a range of strategies for identifying, resisting and understanding pressure
in relationships from peers or others, including sexual pressure, and how to avoid
putting pressure on others.
3. How to determine whether other children, adults or sources of information are
trustworthy, how to judge when a relationship is unsafe (and recognise this in the
relationships of others); how to seek help or advice, including reporting concerns about
others, if needed.
4. How to increase their personal safety in public spaces, including when socialising with
friends, family, the wider community or strangers. Pupils should learn ways of seeking
help when needed and how to report harmful behaviour. Pupils should understand that
there are strategies they can use to increase their safety, and that this does not mean
they will be blamed if they are victims of harmful behaviour. Pupils might reflect on the
importance of trusting their instincts when something doesn’t feel right, and should
understand that in some situations a person might appear trustworthy but have harmful
intentions.
5. What constitutes sexual harassment or sexual violence, and that such behaviour is
unacceptable, emphasising that it is never the fault of the person experiencing it.
6. That sexual harassment includes unsolicited sexual language / attention / touching,
taking and/or sharing intimate or sexual images without consent, public sexual
harassment, pressuring other people to do sexual things, and upskirting.
7. The concepts and laws relating to sexual violence, including rape and sexual assault.
8. The concepts and laws relating to harmful sexual behaviour, which includes all types of
sexual harassment and sexual violence among young people but also includes other
forms of concerning behaviour like using age-inappropriate sexual language.
9. The concepts and laws relating to domestic abuse, including controlling or coercive
behaviour, emotional, sexual, economic or physical abuse, and violent or threatening
behaviour.10
10. That fixated, obsessive, unwanted and repeated behaviours can be criminal, and where
to get help if needed.
11. The concepts and laws relating to harms which are exploitative, including sexual
exploitation, criminal exploitation and abuse, grooming, and financial exploitation.
12. The concepts and laws relating to forced marriage.
13. The physical and emotional damage which can be caused by female genital mutilation
(FGM), virginity testing and hymenoplasty, where to find support, and the law around
these areas. This should include that it is a criminal offence for anyone to perform or
10 The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 recognised children who see, hear, or experience the effects of abuse,
and are related to either the victim of the abusive behaviour, or the perpetrator, as victims of domestic
abuse in their own right (part 1 section 3). The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 statutory guidance is designed to
support statutory and non-statutory bodies working with victims of domestic abuse, including children.
17

assist in the performance of FGM, virginity testing or hymenoplasty, in the UK or
abroad, or to fail to protect a person under 16 for whom they are responsible.
14. That strangulation and suffocation are criminal offences, and that strangulation
(applying pressure to the neck) is an offence, regardless of whether it causes injury.
That any activity that involves applying force or pressure to someone’s neck or covering
someone’s mouth and nose is dangerous and can lead to serious injury or death.
15. That pornography presents some activities as normal which many people do not and
will never engage in, some of which can be emotionally and/or physically harmful.
16. How to seek support for their own worrying or abusive behaviour or for worrying or
abusive behaviour they have experienced from others, including information on where
to report abuse, and where to seek medical attention when required, for example after
an assault.
18

Intimate and sexual relationships, including sexual health
Curriculum content:
1. That sex, for people who feel ready and are over the age of consent, can and should be
enjoyable and positive.
2. The law about the age of consent, that they have a choice about whether to have sex,
that many young people wait until they are older, and that people of all ages can enjoy
intimate and romantic relationships without sex.
3. Sexual consent and their capacity to give, withhold or remove consent at any time, even
if initially given, as well as the considerations that people might take into account prior to
sexual activity, e.g. the law, faith and family values. That kindness and care for others
require more than just consent.
4. That all aspects of health can be affected by choices they make in sex and relationships,
positively or negatively, e.g. physical, emotional, mental, sexual and reproductive health
and wellbeing.
5. That some sexual behaviours can be harmful.
6. The facts about the full range of contraceptive choices, efficacy and options available,
including male and female condoms, and signposting towards medically accurate online
information about sexual and reproductive health to support contraceptive decision-
making.
7. That there are choices in relation to pregnancy. Pupils should be given medically and
legally accurate and impartial information on all options, including keeping the baby,
adoption, abortion and where to get further help.
8. How the different sexually transmitted infections (STIs), including HIV, are transmitted.
How risk can be reduced through safer sex (including through condom use). The use and
availability of the HIV prevention drugs Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) and Post
Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) and how and where to access them. The importance of, and
facts about, regular testing and the role of stigma
9. The prevalence of STIs, the short and long term impact they can have on those who
contract them and key facts about treatment.
10. How the use of alcohol and drugs can lead people to take risks in their sexual behaviour.
11. How and where to seek support for concerns around sexual relationships including
sexual violence or harms.
12. How to counter misinformation, including signposting towards medically accurate
information and further advice, and where to access confidential sexual and reproductive
health advice and treatment.
19

=== SECONDARY HEALTH AND WELLBEING CURRICULUM CONTENT ===

Secondary health and wellbeing curriculum content
Schools should continue to develop knowledge of topics specified for primary as
required and in addition cover the following content by the end of secondary:
Mental wellbeing
Curriculum content:
1. How to talk about their emotions accurately and sensitively, using appropriate
vocabulary.
2. The benefits and importance of physical activity, sleep, time outdoors, community
participation and volunteering or acts of kindness for mental wellbeing and happiness.
3. That happiness is linked to being connected to others. Pupils should be supported to
understand what makes them feel happy and what makes them feel unhappy, while
recognising that loneliness can be for most people an inevitable part of life at times
and is not something of which to be ashamed.
4. That worrying and feeling down are normal, can affect everyone at different times and
are not in themselves a sign of a mental health condition, and that managing those
feelings can be helped by seeing them as normal.
5. Characteristics of common types of mental ill health (e.g. anxiety and depression),
including carefully-presented factual information about the prevalence and
characteristics of more serious mental health conditions. This should not be discussed
in a way that encourages normal feelings to be labelled as mental health conditions.
6. How to critically evaluate which activities will contribute to their overall wellbeing.
7. Understanding how to overcome anxiety or other barriers to participating in fun,
enjoyable or rewarding activities – that it’s possible to overcome those barriers using
coping strategies, and that finding the courage to participate in activities which initially
feel challenging may decrease anxiety over time rather than increasing it.
8. That gambling can lead to serious mental health harms, including anxiety, depression,
and suicide, and that some gambling products are more likely to cause these harms
than others.
9. That the co-occurrence of alcohol/drug use and poor mental health is common and
that the relationship is bi-directional: mental health problems can increase the risk of
alcohol/drug use, and alcohol/drug use can trigger mental health problems or
exacerbate existing ones. That stopping smoking can improve people’s mental health
and decrease anxiety.
27

Wellbeing online
Curriculum content:
1. About the benefits of limiting time spent online, the risks of excessive time spent on
electronic devices and the impact of positive and negative content online on their own
and others’ mental and physical wellbeing.
2. The similarities and differences between the online world and the physical world,
including: the impact of unhealthy or obsessive comparison with others online
(including through setting unrealistic expectations for body image); how people may
curate a specific image of their life online; the impact that an over-reliance on online
relationships, including relationships formed through social media, can have.
3. How to identify harmful behaviours online (including bullying, abuse or harassment)
and how to report, or find support, if they have been affected by those behaviours.
4. The risks related to online gambling and gambling-like content within gaming,
including the accumulation of debt.
5. How advertising and information is targeted at them and how to be a discerning
consumer of information online, understanding the prevalence of misinformation and
disinformation online, including conspiracy theories.
6. The risks of illegal behaviours online, including drug and knife supply or the sale or
purchasing of illicit drugs online.
7. The serious risks of viewing online content that promotes self-harm, suicide or
violence, including how to safely report this material and how to access support after
viewing it.
Physical health and fitness
Curriculum content:
1. The characteristics of a healthy lifestyle, including physical activity and maintaining a
healthy weight, including the links between an inactive lifestyle and ill-health, including
cardiovascular ill-health.
2. Factual information about the prevalence and characteristics of more serious health
conditions.
3. That physical activity can promote wellbeing and combat stress.
4. The science relating to blood, organ and stem cell donation.
Healthy eating
Curriculum content:
1. How to maintain healthy eating and the links between a poor diet and health risks,
including tooth decay, unhealthy weight gain, and cardiovascular disease.
2. The risks of unhealthy weight gain, including increased risks of cancer, type 2 diabetes
and cardiovascular disease.
3. The impacts of alcohol on diet and unhealthy weight gain.
28

Drugs, alcohol, tobacco and vaping
Curriculum content:
1. The facts about which drugs are illegal, the risks of taking illegal drugs, including the
increased risk of potent synthetic drugs being added to illegal drugs, the risks of illicit
vapes containing drugs, illicit drugs and counterfeit medicines, and the potential health
harms, including the link to poor mental health.
2. The law relating to the supply and possession of illegal substances.
3. The physical and psychological risks associated with alcohol consumption. What
constitutes low risk alcohol consumption in adulthood, and the legal age of sale for
alcohol in England. Understanding how to increase personal safety while drinking
alcohol, including how to decrease the risks of having a drink spiked or of poisoning
from potentially fatal substances such as methanol.
4. The physical and psychological consequences of problem-use of alcohol, including
alcohol dependency.
5. The dangers of the misuse of prescribed and over-the-counter medicines.
6. The facts about the multiple serious harms from smoking tobacco (particularly the link
to lung cancer and cardiovascular disease), the benefits of quitting and how to access
support to do so.
7. The facts about vaping, including the harms posed to young people, and the role that
vapes can play in helping adult smokers to quit.
29

Health protection and prevention, and understanding the healthcare system
Curriculum content:
1. Personal hygiene, germs and how they are spread, including bacteria and viruses,
treatment and prevention of infection, and about antibiotics.
2. Dental health and the benefits of good oral hygiene, including brushing teeth twice a
day with fluoride toothpaste and cleaning between teeth, reducing consumption of
sugar-containing food and drinks, and regular check-ups at the dentist.
3. How and when to self-care for minor ailments, and the role of pharmacists as
knowledgeable healthcare professionals.
4. The importance of taking responsibility for their own health, and the benefits of regular
self-examination and screening.
5. The facts and scientific evidence relating to vaccination, immunisation and antimicrobial
resistance. The introduction of topics relating to vaccination and immunisation should
be aligned with when vaccinations are offered to pupils.
6. The importance of sufficient good-quality sleep for good health, the importance of
screen-free time before bed and removing phones from the bedroom, and how a lack of
sleep can affect weight, mood and ability to learn.
7. The importance of healthy behaviours before and during pregnancy, including the
importance of pre-conception health, including taking folic acid. The importance of
pelvic floor health. Information on miscarriage and pregnancy loss, and how to access
care and support.
8. How to navigate their local healthcare system: what a GP is; when to use A&E / minor
injuries; accessing sexual health and family planning clinics; the role of local
pharmacies; and how to seek help via local third sector partners which may have
specialist services.
9. The concept of Gillick competence. That the legal age of medical consent is 16. That
before this, a child’s parents will have responsibility for consenting to medical treatment
on their behalf unless they are Gillick competent to take this decision for themselves.
Pupils should understand the circumstances in which someone over 16 may not be
deemed to have capacity to make decisions about medical treatment.
30

Personal safety
Curriculum content:
1. How to identify risk and manage personal safety in increasingly independent situations,
including around roads, railways – including level crossings - and water (including the
water safety code), and in unfamiliar social or work settings (for example the first time a
young person goes on holiday without their parents).
2. How to recognise and manage peer influence in relation to risk-taking behaviour and
personal safety, including peer influence online and on social media.
3. How to develop key social and emotional skills that will increase pupils’ safety from
involvement in conflict and violence. These include skills to support self-awareness,
self-management, social awareness, relationship skills and responsible decision
making, as well as skills to recognise and manage peer pressure.
4. Understanding which trusted adults they can talk to if pupils are worried about violence
and/or knife crime.
5. The law as it relates to knives and violence. Content and examples should relate to the
local context and avoid using fear as an educational tool. Children should be taught
that carrying weapons is uncommon, and should not be scared into the perception that
many young people are carrying knives (which can lead to the misconception that they
need to carry a knife too).
6. The risks and signs that they may be at risk of grooming or exploitation, and how to
seek help where there is a concern.
Basic first aid
Curriculum content:
1. Basic treatment for common injuries and ailments.
2. Life-saving skills, including how to administer CPR.11
3. The purpose of defibrillators, when one might be needed and who can use them.
Developing bodies
Curriculum content:
1. The main changes which take place in males and females, and the implications for
emotional and physical health.
2. The facts about puberty, the changing adolescent body, including brain development.
3. About menstrual and gynaecological health, including: what is an average period;
period problems such as premenstrual syndrome; heavy menstrual bleeding;
endometriosis; and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). When to seek help from
healthcare professionals.
4. The facts about reproductive health, including fertility and menopause, and the
potential impact of lifestyle on fertility for men and women.
11 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation is usually best taught after 12 years old.
31
