=== RELATIONSHIPS EDUCATION (PRIMARY): CONTENT TO BE COVERED BY THE END OF PRIMARY ===

activity involved. Similarly, good safeguarding practice requires young people to
understand the correct terms for different parts of the body and to be able to confidently
use these terms. This can be provided as part of health education in primary, without
describing any detail of sexual activity.
Curriculum Content
Relationships education (Primary)
24. The focus for primary relationships education should be on teaching the skills and
knowledge that form the building blocks of all positive relationships, supporting children
from the start of their education to grow into kind, caring adults who have respect for
others and know how to keep themselves and others safe.
25. Building children’s understanding and skills at primary is essential for preparing
them for more complex content at secondary. For example, in primary, children will learn
skills for managing difficult feelings in their friendships, like disappointment or anger. This
prepares them to reflect on how to behave with kindness in more complex or challenging
relationships at secondary.
26. Schools should be sensitive to pupils’ circumstances, recognising that families of
many forms provide a nurturing environment for children, and can include single parent
families, same-sex parents, families headed by grandparents, young carers, kinship
carers, adoptive parents and foster parents/carers. Teaching should illustrate a wide
range of family structures in a positive way, and care should be taken to ensure that
children are not stigmatised based on their home circumstances.
27. Primary relationships education should be anchored in an understanding of
positive relationships, but should also equip children to keep themselves and others safe,
and to recognise and report risks and abuse, including online. This can be delivered by
focusing on boundaries, privacy, and children’s rights over their own bodies and personal
information. Pupils should be able to recognise emotional, physical and sexual abuse.
Even very young children can be equipped to understand what counts as abusive
behaviour and to trust their instincts about behaviour that doesn’t feel right. In addition,
pupils should understand about bullying, and that this can include the use of derogatory
terms relating to sex, race, disability or sexual orientation.
28. Pupils should know how to report concerns and seek advice. While teaching
children how to stay safe, including online, teachers should be clear that being a victim of
abuse is never the fault of the child.
29. Primary children should be introduced to protective and preventative content in a
way that does not cause unreasonable alarm and does not appear to normalise risky
behaviours or activities. For example, in late primary, schools may decide to discuss the
7

pressure to share naked images if this is affecting pupils in the school. There may also be
cases, such as when they know that pupils have seen pornography, in which schools may
feel the need to discuss online sexual content. Teaching should be age appropriate and
respectful of all children, including those who may have no familiarity with the topics under
discussion. Schools should also inform parents of any deviation from their published RSE
policy in advance and share any relevant materials with them on request.
Relationships education: content to be covered by the end of primary
Families and people who care for me
Curriculum content:
1. That families are important for children growing up safe and happy because they
can provide love, security and stability.
2. The characteristics of safe and happy family life, such as commitment to each other,
including in times of difficulty, protection and care for children and other family
members, the importance of spending time together and sharing each other’s lives.
3. That the families of other children, either in school or in the wider world, sometimes
look different from their family, but that they should respect those differences and
know that other children’s families are also characterised by love and care.
4. That stable, caring relationships are at the heart of safe and happy families and are
important for children’s security as they grow up.
5. That marriage and civil partnerships represent a formal and legally recognised
commitment of two people to each other which is intended to be lifelong.
6. How to recognise if family relationships are making them feel unhappy or unsafe,
and how to seek help or advice from others if needed.
Caring friendships
Curriculum content:
1. How important friendships are in making us feel happy and secure, and how people
choose and make friends.
2. That healthy friendships are positive and welcoming towards others, and do not
make others feel lonely or excluded. Pupils should learn skills for developing caring,
kind friendships.
3. That not every child will have the friends they would like at all times, that most
people feel lonely sometimes, and that there is no shame in feeling lonely or talking
about it.
4. The characteristics of friendships that lead to happiness and security, including
mutual respect, honesty, trustworthiness, loyalty, kindness, generosity, trust, sharing
interests and experiences, and support with problems and difficulties.
5. That most friendships have ups and downs, and that these can often be worked
through so that the friendship is repaired or even strengthened.
6. How to manage conflict, and that resorting to violence is never right.
7. How to recognise when a friendship is making them feel unhappy or uncomfortable,
and how to get support when needed.
8

Respectful, kind relationships
Curriculum content:
1. How to pay attention to the needs and preferences of others, including in families
and friendships. Pupils should be encouraged to discuss how we balance the needs
and wishes of different people in relationships and why this can be complicated.
2. The importance of setting and respecting healthy boundaries in relationships with
friends, family, peers and adults.
3. How to communicate effectively and manage conflict with kindness and respect;
how to be assertive and express needs and boundaries; how to manage feelings,
including disappointment and frustration.
4. Pupils should have opportunities to discuss the difference between being assertive
and being controlling, and conversely the difference between being kind to other
people and neglecting your own needs.
5. That they can expect to be treated with respect by others, and the importance of
respecting others, including those who are different (for example, physically, in
character, personality or backgrounds), or make different choices, or have different
preferences or beliefs.
6. Practical steps they can take and skills they can develop in a range of different
contexts to improve or support their relationships.
7. The conventions of courtesy and manners.
8. The importance of self-respect and how this links to their own happiness. Pupils
should have opportunities to think about how they foster their own self-esteem and
build a strong sense of their own identity, including through developing skills and
interests.
9. The different types of bullying (including online bullying), the impact of bullying,
responsibilities of bystanders (primarily reporting bullying to an adult), and how to
get help.
10. What a stereotype is, how stereotypes can be unfair, negative, destructive or lead to
bullying and how to challenge a stereotype.
11. How to seek help when needed, including when they are concerned about violence,
harm, or when they are unsure who to trust.
9

Online safety and awareness
Curriculum content:
1. That people should be respectful in online interactions, and that the same
principles apply to online relationships as to face-to-face relationships, including
where people are anonymous. For example, the importance of avoiding putting
pressure on others to share information and images online, and strategies for
resisting peer pressure.
2. How to critically evaluate their online relationships and sources of information,
including awareness of the risks associated with people they have never met. For
example, that people sometimes behave differently online, including pretending to
be someone else, or pretending to be a child, and that this can lead to dangerous
situations. How to recognise harmful content or harmful contact, and how to report
this.
3. That there is a minimum age for joining social media sites (currently 13), which
protects children from inappropriate content or unsafe contact with older social
media users, who may be strangers, including other children and adults.
4. The importance of exercising caution about sharing any information about
themselves online. Understanding the importance of privacy and location settings
to protect information online.
5. Online risks, including that any material provided online might be circulated, and
that once a picture or words has been circulated there is no way of deleting it
everywhere and no control over where it ends up.
6. That the internet contains a lot of content that can be inappropriate and upsetting
for children, and where to go for advice and support when they feel worried or
concerned about something they have seen or engaged with online.
Being Safe
Curriculum content:
1. What sorts of boundaries are appropriate in friendships with peers and others
(including online). This can include learning about boundaries in play and in
negotiations about space, toys, books, resources etc.
2. The concept of privacy and its implications for both children and adults; including
that it is not always right to keep secrets if they relate to being safe.
3. That each person’s body belongs to them, and the differences between appropriate
and inappropriate or unsafe contact, including physical contact.
4. How to respond safely and appropriately to adults they may encounter (in all
contexts, including online), including those they do and do not know.
5. How to recognise when a relationship is harmful or dangerous, including skills for
recognising who to trust and who not to trust.
6. How to report abuse, concerns about something seen online or experienced in real
life, or feelings of being unsafe or feeling bad about any adult and the vocabulary
and confidence needed to do so.
7. How to ask for advice or help for themselves or others, and to keep trying until they
are heard. Where to get advice e.g. family, school and/or other sources.
10

Sex Education (Primary)
30. Sex education is not compulsory in primary schools, but we recommend that
primaries teach sex education in years 5 and/or 6, in line with content about conception
and birth, which forms part of the national curriculum for science. The national curriculum
for science includes subject content in related areas, such as the main external body
parts, the human body as it grows from birth to old age (including puberty) and
reproduction in some plants and animals. Schools may also cover human reproduction in
the science curriculum, but where they do so, this should be in line with the factual
description of conception in the science curriculum.
31. Primary schools should consult parents about the content of anything that will be
taught within sex education. This process should include offering parents support in
talking to their children about sex education and how to link this with what is being taught
in school as well as advice about parents’ right to request withdrawal from sex education.
Relationships and Sex Education (RSE): Secondary
32. RSE in secondary should provide a clear progression from primary relationships
education. RSE should provide young people with the information they need to develop
healthy, safe and nurturing relationships of all kinds. This should include the knowledge
they need in later life to keep themselves and others safe, and how to avoid sexually
transmitted infections and unplanned pregnancies.
33. Effective RSE focuses on respect for oneself and others and does not encourage
or normalise early sexual experimentation. By supporting confidence and self-esteem,
RSE will enable young people to make their own choices about whether or when to
develop safe, fulfilling and healthy sexual relationships, once they reach the age of
consent, and to resist pressure to have sex.
34. Effective teaching will be participative and interactive and will give pupils
opportunities to develop skills and to discuss and critically evaluate complex relationship
scenarios.
35. RSE in secondary will cover a range of topics, including topics related to abusive
behaviour. While teaching children how to stay safe, including online, teachers should be
clear that being a victim of abuse is never the fault of the child or young person. Different
forms of abuse should be addressed sensitively and clearly at appropriate ages. For
pupils who are experiencing or have experienced unhealthy or unsafe relationships,
including at home, schools have an important role as a place of consistency and safety
where pupils can find support.
11

36. When teaching sensitive topics, teachers can use approaches such as distancing
techniques, setting ground rules with the class to help manage sensitive discussion, and
using question boxes to allow pupils to raise issues anonymously.
12

=== SECONDARY RELATIONSHIPS AND SEX EDUCATION CURRICULUM CONTENT ===

Secondary relationships and sex education curriculum
content
Schools should continue to develop knowledge of topics specified for primary as
required and in addition cover the following content by the end of secondary:
Families
Curriculum content:
1. That there are different types of committed, stable relationships.
2. How these relationships might contribute to wellbeing, and their importance for bringing
up children.
3. Why marriage or civil partnership is an important relationship choice for many couples.
The legal status of marriage and civil partnership, including that they carry legal rights,
benefits and protections that are not available to couples who are cohabiting or who
have, for example, undergone a non-legally binding religious ceremony.
4. That ‘common-law marriage’ is a myth and cohabitants do not obtain marriage-like status
or rights from living together or by having children.
5. That forced marriage and marrying before the age of 18 are illegal.8
6. How families and relationships change over time, including through birth, death,
separation and new relationships.
7. The roles and responsibilities of parents with respect to raising children, including the
characteristics of successful parenting and the importance of the early years of a child’s
life for brain development.
8. How to judge when a relationship is unsafe and where to seek help when needed,
including when pupils are concerned about violence, harm, or when they are unsure who
to trust.
8 Age of Marriage Act 2023
13

Respectful relationships
Curriculum content:
1. The characteristics of positive relationships of all kinds, online and offline, including
romantic relationships. For example, pupils should understand the role of consent, trust,
mutual respect, honesty, kindness, loyalty, shared interests and outlooks, generosity,
boundaries, tolerance, privacy, and the management of conflict, reconciliation and
ending relationships.
2. How to evaluate their impact on other people and treat others with kindness and
respect, including in public spaces and including strangers. Pupils should understand
the legal rights and responsibilities regarding equality, and that everyone is unique and
equal.
3. The importance of self-esteem, independence and having a positive relationship with
oneself, and how these characteristics support healthy relationships with others. This
includes developing one’s own interests, hobbies, friendship groups, and skills. Pupils
should understand what it means to be treated with respect by others.
4. What tolerance requires, including the importance of tolerance of other people’s beliefs.
5. The practical steps pupils can take and skills they can develop to support respectful and
kind relationships. This includes skills for communicating respectfully within
relationships and with strangers, including in situations of conflict.
6. The different types of bullying (including online bullying), the impact of bullying, the
responsibilities of bystanders to report bullying and how and where to get help.
7. Skills for ending relationships or friendships with kindness and managing the difficult
feelings that endings might bring, including disappointment, hurt or frustration.
8. The role of consent, including in romantic and sexual relationships. Pupils should
understand that ethical behaviour goes beyond consent and involves kindness, care,
attention to the needs and vulnerabilities of the other person, as well as an awareness
of power dynamics. Pupils should understand that just because someone says yes to
doing something, that doesn’t automatically make it ethically ok.
9. How stereotypes, in particular stereotypes based on sex, gender reassignment, race,
religion, sexual orientation or disability, can cause damage (e.g. how they might
normalise non-consensual behaviour or encourage prejudice). Pupils should be
equipped to recognise misogyny and other forms of prejudice.
10. How inequalities of power can impact behaviour within relationships, including sexual
relationships. For example, how people who are disempowered can feel they are not
entitled to be treated with respect by others or how those who enjoy an unequal amount
of power might, with or without realising it, impose their preferences on others.
11. How pornography can negatively influence sexual attitudes and behaviours, including
by normalising harmful sexual behaviours and by disempowering some people,
especially women, to feel a sense of autonomy over their own body and providing some
people with a sense of sexual entitlement to the bodies of others.
12. Pupils should have an opportunity to discuss how some sub-cultures might influence
our understanding of sexual ethics, including the sexual norms endorsed by so-called
“involuntary celibates” (incels) or online influencers.
14

Online safety and awareness
Curriculum content:
1. Rights, responsibilities and opportunities online, including that the same expectations of
behaviour apply in all contexts, including online.
2. Online risks, including the importance of being cautious about sharing personal
information online and of using privacy and location settings appropriately to protect
information online. Pupils should also understand the difference between public and
private online spaces and related safety issues.
3. The characteristics of social media, including that some social media accounts are fake,
and / or may post things which aren’t real / have been created with AI. That social
media users may say things in more extreme ways than they might in face-to-face
situations, and that some users present highly exaggerated or idealised profiles of
themselves online.
4. Not to provide material to others that they would not want to be distributed further and
not to pass on personal material which is sent to them. Pupils should understand that
any material provided online might be circulated, and that once this has happened there
is no way of controlling where it ends up. Pupils should understand the serious risks of
sending material to others, including the law concerning the sharing of images.
5. That keeping or forwarding indecent or sexual images of someone under 18 is a crime,
even if the photo is of themselves or of someone who has consented, and even if the
image was created by the child and/or using AI generated imagery. Pupils should
understand the potentially serious consequences of acquiring or generating indecent or
sexual images of someone under 18, including the potential for criminal charges and
severe penalties including imprisonment. Pupils should know how to seek support and
should understand that they will not be in trouble for asking for help, either at school or
with the police, if an image of themselves has been shared. Pupils should also
understand that sharing indecent images of people over 18 without consent is a crime.
6. What to do and how to report when they are concerned about material that has been
circulated, including personal information, images or videos, and how to manage issues
online.9
7. About the prevalence of deepfakes including videos and photos, how deepfakes can be
used maliciously as well as for entertainment, the harms that can be caused by
deepfakes and how to identify them.
8. That the internet contains inappropriate and upsetting content, some of which is illegal,
including unacceptable content that encourages misogyny, violence or use of weapons.
Pupils should be taught where to go for advice and support about something they have
seen online. Pupils should understand that online content can present a distorted
picture of the world and normalise or glamorise behaviours which are unhealthy and
wrong.
9. That social media can lead to escalations in conflicts, how to avoid these escalations
and where to go for help and advice.
10. How to identify when technology and social media is used as part of bullying,
harassment, stalking, coercive and controlling behaviour, and other forms of abusive
and/or illegal behaviour and how to seek support about concerns.
9 For example, see Report Remove
15

11. That pornography, and other online content, often presents a distorted picture of people
and their sexual behaviours and can negatively affect how people behave towards
sexual partners. This can affect pupils who see pornographic content accidentally as
well as those who see it deliberately. Pornography can also portray misogynistic
behaviours and attitudes which can negatively influence those who see it.
12. How information and data is generated, collected, shared and used online.
13. That websites may share personal data about their users, and information collected on
their internet use, for commercial purposes (e.g. to enable targeted advertising).
14. That criminals can operate online scams, for example using fake websites or emails to
extort money or valuable personal information. This information can be used to the
detriment of the person or wider society. About risks of sextortion, how to identify online
scams relating to sex, and how to seek support if they have been scammed or involved
in sextortion.
15. That AI chatbots are an example of how AI is rapidly developing, and that these can
pose risks by creating fake intimacy or offering harmful advice. It is important to be able
to critically think about new types of technology as they appear online and how they
might pose a risk.
16

Being Safe
Curriculum content:
1. How to recognise, respect and communicate consent and boundaries in relationships,
including in early romantic relationships (in all contexts, including online) and early
sexual relationships that might involve kissing or touching. That kindness and care for
others requires more than just consent.
2. That there are a range of strategies for identifying, resisting and understanding pressure
in relationships from peers or others, including sexual pressure, and how to avoid
putting pressure on others.
3. How to determine whether other children, adults or sources of information are
trustworthy, how to judge when a relationship is unsafe (and recognise this in the
relationships of others); how to seek help or advice, including reporting concerns about
others, if needed.
4. How to increase their personal safety in public spaces, including when socialising with
friends, family, the wider community or strangers. Pupils should learn ways of seeking
help when needed and how to report harmful behaviour. Pupils should understand that
there are strategies they can use to increase their safety, and that this does not mean
they will be blamed if they are victims of harmful behaviour. Pupils might reflect on the
importance of trusting their instincts when something doesn’t feel right, and should
understand that in some situations a person might appear trustworthy but have harmful
intentions.
5. What constitutes sexual harassment or sexual violence, and that such behaviour is
unacceptable, emphasising that it is never the fault of the person experiencing it.
6. That sexual harassment includes unsolicited sexual language / attention / touching,
taking and/or sharing intimate or sexual images without consent, public sexual
harassment, pressuring other people to do sexual things, and upskirting.
7. The concepts and laws relating to sexual violence, including rape and sexual assault.
8. The concepts and laws relating to harmful sexual behaviour, which includes all types of
sexual harassment and sexual violence among young people but also includes other
forms of concerning behaviour like using age-inappropriate sexual language.
9. The concepts and laws relating to domestic abuse, including controlling or coercive
behaviour, emotional, sexual, economic or physical abuse, and violent or threatening
behaviour.10
10. That fixated, obsessive, unwanted and repeated behaviours can be criminal, and where
to get help if needed.
11. The concepts and laws relating to harms which are exploitative, including sexual
exploitation, criminal exploitation and abuse, grooming, and financial exploitation.
12. The concepts and laws relating to forced marriage.
13. The physical and emotional damage which can be caused by female genital mutilation
(FGM), virginity testing and hymenoplasty, where to find support, and the law around
these areas. This should include that it is a criminal offence for anyone to perform or
10 The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 recognised children who see, hear, or experience the effects of abuse,
and are related to either the victim of the abusive behaviour, or the perpetrator, as victims of domestic
abuse in their own right (part 1 section 3). The Domestic Abuse Act 2021 statutory guidance is designed to
support statutory and non-statutory bodies working with victims of domestic abuse, including children.
17

assist in the performance of FGM, virginity testing or hymenoplasty, in the UK or
abroad, or to fail to protect a person under 16 for whom they are responsible.
14. That strangulation and suffocation are criminal offences, and that strangulation
(applying pressure to the neck) is an offence, regardless of whether it causes injury.
That any activity that involves applying force or pressure to someone’s neck or covering
someone’s mouth and nose is dangerous and can lead to serious injury or death.
15. That pornography presents some activities as normal which many people do not and
will never engage in, some of which can be emotionally and/or physically harmful.
16. How to seek support for their own worrying or abusive behaviour or for worrying or
abusive behaviour they have experienced from others, including information on where
to report abuse, and where to seek medical attention when required, for example after
an assault.
18

Intimate and sexual relationships, including sexual health
Curriculum content:
1. That sex, for people who feel ready and are over the age of consent, can and should be
enjoyable and positive.
2. The law about the age of consent, that they have a choice about whether to have sex,
that many young people wait until they are older, and that people of all ages can enjoy
intimate and romantic relationships without sex.
3. Sexual consent and their capacity to give, withhold or remove consent at any time, even
if initially given, as well as the considerations that people might take into account prior to
sexual activity, e.g. the law, faith and family values. That kindness and care for others
require more than just consent.
4. That all aspects of health can be affected by choices they make in sex and relationships,
positively or negatively, e.g. physical, emotional, mental, sexual and reproductive health
and wellbeing.
5. That some sexual behaviours can be harmful.
6. The facts about the full range of contraceptive choices, efficacy and options available,
including male and female condoms, and signposting towards medically accurate online
information about sexual and reproductive health to support contraceptive decision-
making.
7. That there are choices in relation to pregnancy. Pupils should be given medically and
legally accurate and impartial information on all options, including keeping the baby,
adoption, abortion and where to get further help.
8. How the different sexually transmitted infections (STIs), including HIV, are transmitted.
How risk can be reduced through safer sex (including through condom use). The use and
availability of the HIV prevention drugs Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) and Post
Exposure Prophylaxis (PEP) and how and where to access them. The importance of, and
facts about, regular testing and the role of stigma
9. The prevalence of STIs, the short and long term impact they can have on those who
contract them and key facts about treatment.
10. How the use of alcohol and drugs can lead people to take risks in their sexual behaviour.
11. How and where to seek support for concerns around sexual relationships including
sexual violence or harms.
12. How to counter misinformation, including signposting towards medically accurate
information and further advice, and where to access confidential sexual and reproductive
health advice and treatment.
19

=== PRIMARY HEALTH AND WELLBEING: CONTENT TO BE COVERED BY THE END OF PRIMARY ===

Primary health and wellbeing: content to be covered by the end of
primary
General wellbeing
Curriculum content:
1. The benefits of physical activity, time outdoors, and helping others for health,
wellbeing and happiness. Simple self-care techniques, including the importance of
rest, time spent with friends and family, as well as hobbies, interests and
community participation.
2. The importance of promoting general wellbeing and physical health.
3. The range and scale of emotions (e.g. happiness, sadness, anger, fear, surprise,
nervousness) that they might experience in different situations. Pupils should
understand that worrying and feeling down are normal, affect everyone at different
times, and are not in themselves a sign of a mental health condition.
4. How to recognise feelings and use varied vocabulary to talk about their own and
others’ feelings.
5. How to judge whether what they are feeling and how they are behaving is
appropriate and proportionate.
6. That isolation and loneliness can affect children, and the benefits of seeking
support.
7. That bullying (including cyberbullying) has a negative and often lasting impact on
mental wellbeing and how to seek help for themselves or others.
8. That change and loss, including bereavement, can provoke a range of feelings,
that grief is a natural response to bereavement, and that everyone grieves
differently.
9. Where and how to seek support (including recognising the triggers for seeking
support), including who in school they should speak to if they are worried about
their own or someone else’s mental wellbeing or ability to control their emotions
(including issues arising online).
10. That it is common to experience mental health problems, and early support can
help.
21

Wellbeing online
Curriculum content:
1. That for almost everyone the internet is an integral part of life. Pupils should be
supported to think about positive and negative aspects of the internet.
2. Pupils should be supported to discuss how online relationships can complement
and support meaningful in-person relationships, but also how they might be in
tension, and the reasons why online relationships are unlikely to be a good
substitute for high quality in-person relationships, looking at the pros and cons of
different ways of using online connection.
3. The benefits of limiting time spent online, the risks of excessive time spent on
electronic devices and the impact of positive and negative content online on their
own and others’ mental and physical wellbeing.
4. How to consider the impact of their online behaviour on others, and how to
recognise and display respectful behaviour online.
5. Why social media, some apps, computer games and online gaming, including
gambling sites, are age restricted.
6. The risks relating to online gaming, video game monetisation, scams, fraud and
other financial harms, and that gaming can become addictive.
7. How to take a critical approach to what they see and read online and make
responsible decisions about which content, including content on social media and
apps, is appropriate for them.
8. That abuse, bullying and harassment can take place online and that this can
impact wellbeing. How to seek support from trusted adults.
9. How to understand the information they find online, including from search engines,
and know how information is selected and targeted.
10. That they have rights in relation to sharing personal data, privacy and consent.
11. Where and how to report concerns and get support with issues online.
22

Physical health and fitness
Curriculum content:
1. The characteristics and mental and physical benefits of an active lifestyle.
2. The importance of building regular physical activity into daily and weekly routines
and how to achieve this; for example, walking or cycling to school, a daily active
mile or other forms of regular, moderate and/or vigorous physical activity.
3. The risks associated with an inactive lifestyle, including obesity.
4. How and when to seek support including which adults to speak to in school if they
are worried about their health.
Healthy eating
Curriculum content:
1. What constitutes a healthy diet (including understanding calories and other
nutritional content).
2. Understanding the importance of a healthy relationship with food.
3. The principles of planning and preparing a range of healthy meals.
4. The characteristics of a poor diet and risks associated with unhealthy eating
(including, for example, obesity and tooth decay) and other behaviours (e.g. the
impact of alcohol on diet or health).
Drugs, alcohol, tobacco and vaping
Curriculum content:
1. The facts about legal and illegal harmful substances and associated risks,
including smoking, vaping, alcohol use and drug-taking. This should include the
risks of nicotine addiction, which are also caused by other nicotine products such
as nicotine pouches.
23

Health protection and prevention
Curriculum content:
1. How to recognise early signs of physical illness, such as weight loss, or
unexplained changes to the body.
2. About safe and unsafe exposure to the sun, and how to reduce the risk of sun
damage, including skin cancer.
3. The importance of sufficient good quality sleep for health, the amount of sleep
recommended for their age, and practical steps for improving sleep, such as not
using screens in the bedroom. The impact of poor sleep on weight, mood and
ability to learn.
4. About dental health and the benefits of good oral hygiene, including brushing teeth
twice a day with fluoride toothpaste, cleaning between teeth, and regular check-
ups at the dentist.
5. About personal hygiene and germs including bacteria, viruses, how they are
spread and treated, and the importance of handwashing.
6. The facts and scientific evidence relating to vaccination and immunisation. The
introduction of topics relating to vaccination and immunisation should be aligned
with when vaccinations are offered to pupils.
Personal safety
Curriculum content:
1. About hazards (including fire risks) that may cause harm, injury or risk and ways to
reduce risks.
2. How to recognise risk and keep safe around roads, railways, including level
crossings, and water, including the water safety code.
Basic first aid
Curriculum content:
1. How to make a clear and efficient call to emergency services if necessary,
including the importance of reporting incidents rather than filming them.
2. Concepts of basic first aid, for example dealing with common injuries and ailments,
including head injuries.
24

Developing bodies
Curriculum content:
1. About growth and other ways the body can change and develop, particularly
during adolescence. This topic should include the human lifecycle, and puberty
should be discussed as a stage in this process.
2. The correct names of body parts, including the penis, vulva, vagina, testicles,
scrotum, nipples. Pupils should understand that all of these parts of the body are
private and have skills to understand and express their own boundaries around
these body parts.
3. The facts about the menstrual cycle, including physical and emotional changes,
whilst the average age of the onset of menstruation is twelve, periods can start at
eight, so covering this topic before girls’ periods start will help them understand
what to expect and avoid distress.
Health and wellbeing: Secondary
41. Teaching in secondary should build on primary content, supporting pupils to
understand their changing bodies and their feelings, how to protect their own health and
wellbeing, and when a physical or mental health issue requires attention.
42. Secondary schools may also choose to teach about issues which are not listed in
the secondary curriculum content. This includes topics such as eating disorders and self-
harm. These topics can be taught about in secondary schools in a safe and sensitive way
but are specialised areas and schools should use qualified support or advice, ensure that
they are using reliable high-quality teaching material, and signpost to external support as
needed. Schools may consider accessing support from the NHS or local specialist
services who may be able to provide advice and CPD for teachers. It is important that
schools ensure that teachers are properly equipped to lead discussions about these
topics, including what to do if a pupil makes a disclosure.
43. Secondary schools should also consider how to safely address suicide prevention.
Many aspects of suicide prevention are addressed through the mental wellbeing
curriculum. Starting in primary school, the curriculum includes recognising and talking
about emotions, looking after one’s own and others’ wellbeing, being worried about
friendships, other relationships, and judging whether feelings or behaviour require
support. Teachers should discuss isolation, loneliness and bullying, and how to cope
when things go wrong in life. It is also important to ensure pupils understand how to seek
help from a trusted adult, including when they are concerned about another person.
44. Schools should consult mental health professionals and put in place high quality,
evidence-based staff training before addressing suicide directly with secondary aged
pupils, to ensure that staff have the knowledge and skills to do this safely. It is important
that teachers use language and content that is accurate, straightforward and appropriate
25

=== SECONDARY HEALTH AND WELLBEING CURRICULUM CONTENT ===

Secondary health and wellbeing curriculum content
Schools should continue to develop knowledge of topics specified for primary as
required and in addition cover the following content by the end of secondary:
Mental wellbeing
Curriculum content:
1. How to talk about their emotions accurately and sensitively, using appropriate
vocabulary.
2. The benefits and importance of physical activity, sleep, time outdoors, community
participation and volunteering or acts of kindness for mental wellbeing and happiness.
3. That happiness is linked to being connected to others. Pupils should be supported to
understand what makes them feel happy and what makes them feel unhappy, while
recognising that loneliness can be for most people an inevitable part of life at times
and is not something of which to be ashamed.
4. That worrying and feeling down are normal, can affect everyone at different times and
are not in themselves a sign of a mental health condition, and that managing those
feelings can be helped by seeing them as normal.
5. Characteristics of common types of mental ill health (e.g. anxiety and depression),
including carefully-presented factual information about the prevalence and
characteristics of more serious mental health conditions. This should not be discussed
in a way that encourages normal feelings to be labelled as mental health conditions.
6. How to critically evaluate which activities will contribute to their overall wellbeing.
7. Understanding how to overcome anxiety or other barriers to participating in fun,
enjoyable or rewarding activities – that it’s possible to overcome those barriers using
coping strategies, and that finding the courage to participate in activities which initially
feel challenging may decrease anxiety over time rather than increasing it.
8. That gambling can lead to serious mental health harms, including anxiety, depression,
and suicide, and that some gambling products are more likely to cause these harms
than others.
9. That the co-occurrence of alcohol/drug use and poor mental health is common and
that the relationship is bi-directional: mental health problems can increase the risk of
alcohol/drug use, and alcohol/drug use can trigger mental health problems or
exacerbate existing ones. That stopping smoking can improve people’s mental health
and decrease anxiety.
27

Wellbeing online
Curriculum content:
1. About the benefits of limiting time spent online, the risks of excessive time spent on
electronic devices and the impact of positive and negative content online on their own
and others’ mental and physical wellbeing.
2. The similarities and differences between the online world and the physical world,
including: the impact of unhealthy or obsessive comparison with others online
(including through setting unrealistic expectations for body image); how people may
curate a specific image of their life online; the impact that an over-reliance on online
relationships, including relationships formed through social media, can have.
3. How to identify harmful behaviours online (including bullying, abuse or harassment)
and how to report, or find support, if they have been affected by those behaviours.
4. The risks related to online gambling and gambling-like content within gaming,
including the accumulation of debt.
5. How advertising and information is targeted at them and how to be a discerning
consumer of information online, understanding the prevalence of misinformation and
disinformation online, including conspiracy theories.
6. The risks of illegal behaviours online, including drug and knife supply or the sale or
purchasing of illicit drugs online.
7. The serious risks of viewing online content that promotes self-harm, suicide or
violence, including how to safely report this material and how to access support after
viewing it.
Physical health and fitness
Curriculum content:
1. The characteristics of a healthy lifestyle, including physical activity and maintaining a
healthy weight, including the links between an inactive lifestyle and ill-health, including
cardiovascular ill-health.
2. Factual information about the prevalence and characteristics of more serious health
conditions.
3. That physical activity can promote wellbeing and combat stress.
4. The science relating to blood, organ and stem cell donation.
Healthy eating
Curriculum content:
1. How to maintain healthy eating and the links between a poor diet and health risks,
including tooth decay, unhealthy weight gain, and cardiovascular disease.
2. The risks of unhealthy weight gain, including increased risks of cancer, type 2 diabetes
and cardiovascular disease.
3. The impacts of alcohol on diet and unhealthy weight gain.
28

Drugs, alcohol, tobacco and vaping
Curriculum content:
1. The facts about which drugs are illegal, the risks of taking illegal drugs, including the
increased risk of potent synthetic drugs being added to illegal drugs, the risks of illicit
vapes containing drugs, illicit drugs and counterfeit medicines, and the potential health
harms, including the link to poor mental health.
2. The law relating to the supply and possession of illegal substances.
3. The physical and psychological risks associated with alcohol consumption. What
constitutes low risk alcohol consumption in adulthood, and the legal age of sale for
alcohol in England. Understanding how to increase personal safety while drinking
alcohol, including how to decrease the risks of having a drink spiked or of poisoning
from potentially fatal substances such as methanol.
4. The physical and psychological consequences of problem-use of alcohol, including
alcohol dependency.
5. The dangers of the misuse of prescribed and over-the-counter medicines.
6. The facts about the multiple serious harms from smoking tobacco (particularly the link
to lung cancer and cardiovascular disease), the benefits of quitting and how to access
support to do so.
7. The facts about vaping, including the harms posed to young people, and the role that
vapes can play in helping adult smokers to quit.
29

Health protection and prevention, and understanding the healthcare system
Curriculum content:
1. Personal hygiene, germs and how they are spread, including bacteria and viruses,
treatment and prevention of infection, and about antibiotics.
2. Dental health and the benefits of good oral hygiene, including brushing teeth twice a
day with fluoride toothpaste and cleaning between teeth, reducing consumption of
sugar-containing food and drinks, and regular check-ups at the dentist.
3. How and when to self-care for minor ailments, and the role of pharmacists as
knowledgeable healthcare professionals.
4. The importance of taking responsibility for their own health, and the benefits of regular
self-examination and screening.
5. The facts and scientific evidence relating to vaccination, immunisation and antimicrobial
resistance. The introduction of topics relating to vaccination and immunisation should
be aligned with when vaccinations are offered to pupils.
6. The importance of sufficient good-quality sleep for good health, the importance of
screen-free time before bed and removing phones from the bedroom, and how a lack of
sleep can affect weight, mood and ability to learn.
7. The importance of healthy behaviours before and during pregnancy, including the
importance of pre-conception health, including taking folic acid. The importance of
pelvic floor health. Information on miscarriage and pregnancy loss, and how to access
care and support.
8. How to navigate their local healthcare system: what a GP is; when to use A&E / minor
injuries; accessing sexual health and family planning clinics; the role of local
pharmacies; and how to seek help via local third sector partners which may have
specialist services.
9. The concept of Gillick competence. That the legal age of medical consent is 16. That
before this, a child’s parents will have responsibility for consenting to medical treatment
on their behalf unless they are Gillick competent to take this decision for themselves.
Pupils should understand the circumstances in which someone over 16 may not be
deemed to have capacity to make decisions about medical treatment.
30

Personal safety
Curriculum content:
1. How to identify risk and manage personal safety in increasingly independent situations,
including around roads, railways – including level crossings - and water (including the
water safety code), and in unfamiliar social or work settings (for example the first time a
young person goes on holiday without their parents).
2. How to recognise and manage peer influence in relation to risk-taking behaviour and
personal safety, including peer influence online and on social media.
3. How to develop key social and emotional skills that will increase pupils’ safety from
involvement in conflict and violence. These include skills to support self-awareness,
self-management, social awareness, relationship skills and responsible decision
making, as well as skills to recognise and manage peer pressure.
4. Understanding which trusted adults they can talk to if pupils are worried about violence
and/or knife crime.
5. The law as it relates to knives and violence. Content and examples should relate to the
local context and avoid using fear as an educational tool. Children should be taught
that carrying weapons is uncommon, and should not be scared into the perception that
many young people are carrying knives (which can lead to the misconception that they
need to carry a knife too).
6. The risks and signs that they may be at risk of grooming or exploitation, and how to
seek help where there is a concern.
Basic first aid
Curriculum content:
1. Basic treatment for common injuries and ailments.
2. Life-saving skills, including how to administer CPR.11
3. The purpose of defibrillators, when one might be needed and who can use them.
Developing bodies
Curriculum content:
1. The main changes which take place in males and females, and the implications for
emotional and physical health.
2. The facts about puberty, the changing adolescent body, including brain development.
3. About menstrual and gynaecological health, including: what is an average period;
period problems such as premenstrual syndrome; heavy menstrual bleeding;
endometriosis; and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). When to seek help from
healthcare professionals.
4. The facts about reproductive health, including fertility and menopause, and the
potential impact of lifestyle on fertility for men and women.
11 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation is usually best taught after 12 years old.
31