NZC – Social Sciences Phase 2 (Years 4–6)
This page provides the draft knowledge overview and teaching sequence for Phase 2 (Years 4–6) of the Social Sciences Learning Area. This is now available for wider feedback and familiarisation. The current Social Sciences curriculum remains in effect until 1 January 2027.
About this resource
This page provides the draft Phase 2 (Years 4–6) Social Sciences Learning Area. This is now available for wider feedback and familiarisation. The current Social Sciences curriculum remains in effect until 1 January 2027 and can be found here:
The New Zealand Curriculum – Social Sciences
.
Add to Kete
Add to kete
Add to Collection
Add to collection
Add to Kete
Download resources
Unuhia te rito o te harakeke kei whea te kōmako e kō?
Whakatairangitia — rere ki uta, rere ki tai;
Ui mai koe ki ahau he aha te mea nui o te ao,
Māku e kī atu he tangata, he tangata, he tangata!
Nā, Meri Ngāroto, Te Aupōuri (1830s)
Remove the heart of the flax bush and where will the kōmako sing?
Proclaim it to the land, proclaim it to the sea;
Ask me, 'What is the greatest thing in the world?'
I will reply, 'It is people, people, people!'.
History
Knowledge
The facts, concepts, principles, and theories to teach.
Practices
The skills, strategies, and applications to teach.
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
New Zealand History
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TREATY OF WAITANGI | TE TIRITI O WAITANGI
The Treaty of Waitangi | te Tiriti o Waitangi is important as New Zealand’s founding agreement between the British Crown and Māori rangatira (chiefs).
The Treaty of Waitangi | te Tiriti o Waitangi was first signed on 6 February 1840 at Waitangi in the Bay of Islands.
The Treaty of Waitangi | te Tiriti o Waitangi has ongoing significance as a symbol of mutual respect, shared heritage, and commitment to working together.
There are two documents: the Treaty of Waitangi in English and te Tiriti o Waitangi in te reo Māori.
James Busby acted as the British Resident in New Zealand from 1833. He played a role in developing the first New Zealand flag in 1834 (United Tribes flag) and helped to facilitate the drafting of the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840.
William Hobson was the first Governor of New Zealand. He proposed a treaty with Māori to establish British sovereignty.
Henry Williams translated the Treaty of Waitangi into te reo Māori with his son Edward and explained it to Māori chiefs. As the leader of the Church Missionary Society in New Zealand, he contributed to the spread of Christianity among Māori and expanded colonial settlement. He also attempted to prevent hostilities at Kororāreka in 1845.
Hōne Heke was the first Māori chief to sign the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840. Later, he led Māori resistance against British colonial authority over Treaty breaches and to protect rangatiratanga. He ordered the cutting of the British flagstaff at Kororāreka four times between 1844 and 1845, sparking the Northern War.
NATURAL EVENTS OF HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE IN NEW ZEALAND
Mt Tarawera
Pink and White Terraces.
Promotion of New Zealand landscapes to Victorian travellers. An early site of tourism.
The eruption (1886) and impacts:
Lasted six hours and caused massive destruction.
Destroyed a number of villages and buried the Pink and White Terraces.
Devastating impact through loss of life; loss of landscape. Impact on the livelihoods of Māori — guiding and tourism.
Interpretations of the events at the time: phantom canoe, Sophia Hinerangi, Tuhoto Ariki.
Subsequent development (1931) of Buried Village of Te Wairoa as a tourist attraction and archaeological site.
A case study building on Year 5 Geography
Teachers choose one of the following as a case study with a focus on recovery and regeneration:
Hawke’s Bay earthquake (1931)
Tangiwai Disaster (1953)
Cyclone Giselle (1968)
Southland Floods (1984)
Cyclone Bola (1988)
Canterbury earthquake (2011)
West Coast Floods (2022)
Newspaper articles, first-hand accounts, and photographic evidence can enrich this study.
NEW ZEALAND TO 1840
Impact, including Māori response, of early European contact on:
Trade and settlement
Sealing and whaling (from the 1790s, port towns and trading posts, Māori–Pākehā individuals like Barnet Burns).
Māori provision of timber, flax, and food in exchange for muskets, iron goods, and blankets.
Impact of new diseases (measles, influenza) on Māori population.
Missionaries, literacy, and cultural exchange
Arrival of Christian missionaries: provision of European farming tools, healthcare, and schooling.
Establishment of a te reo Māori press, distribution of translations, and rapid growth of literacy.
Māori adaptation of Christian ideas alongside traditional Indigenous spiritual practices.
Land ownership and sovereignty
Petitions to King William IV and other Crown appeals by rangatira seeking protection, redress, or recognition.
1835 Declaration of Independence | He Whakaputanga signed by rangatira.
Early land-purchase deeds (New Zealand Company), contrasting Māori concepts of use, tūrangawaewae, and mana versus the Crown’s notion of permanent sale.
The Musket Wars
Musket Wars (c.1810s–1830s): causes, major campaigns, and consequences for population movements and tribal boundaries. Hongi Hika’s role.
Moriori
The expression of mana through Nunuku’s Law and the renunciation of violence even in the face of great external challenges (the arrival of Europeans from the 1790s and of Ngāti Tama and Ngāti Mutunga from 1835).
For example, consider:
examples of different ways that people commemorate Waitangi Day across New Zealand
why the Treaty of Waitangi | te Tiriti o Waitangi is important to public life in New Zealand today
how information can be collected about the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi | te Tiriti o Waitangi
For example, consider:
how Māori social, economic, and cultural practices changed following the Tarawera eruption
the consequences on trade and settlement
the changes to population and environments over the period
how legislation and town planning evolved followed natural events
how sources such as newspaper articles, first-hand accounts, and photographic evidence can be used to reconstruct historical narratives
how historical documents and artefacts can be studied to understand how and why societies and events change over time
For example, consider:
how Māori social, economic, and cultural practices changed with the arrival of European settlers
the consequences of European arrival on trade and settlement
the causes of the Musket Wars
the consequences of missionaries, literacy, and cultural exchange on Māori society
the changes to population and environments over the period
Global History
ANCIENT GREECE C.800 BCE–323 BCE
Where and when
Location and geographical features of Ancient Greek city states.
Timeline of key periods: Archaic, Classical, Hellenistic.
Government and society: Athens and other city states
How society was structured, including role of women and slaves and daily life.
What the role of government was, with a focus on democracy and empire.
How Sparta and Corinth were different from Athens (as city states)
Religious beliefs and culture
The importance of religion: gods, temples, and festivals (Olympics, Dionysia).
Development of philosophy and importance of philosophers including: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.
The importance of Art, architecture, literature, and drama (tragedy and comedy).
Military and warfare
Importance of hoplites.
Significance of key battles in the Persian Wars (Marathon, Thermopylae, Salamis).
The Peloponnesian War: causes and effect on Greek unity and identity.
Greek legacies
Contributions to government, philosophy, science, architecture.
DYNASTIES IN ANCIENT AND IMPERIAL CHINA, C.2100–1912 CE
Shang Dynasty
Where and when?
Yellow River valley (northern China).
About 1600–1046 BCE.
Bronze Age.
Farming
Flood control and millet/rice paddy fields — building ditches and fields held back floods. Creation of reliable agricultural surpluses for towns.
Power and rulers (government)
Hereditary kings directed religious rituals although not considered divine. Made law, raised taxes, led armies. Leaders in regions helped the king govern.
People and daily life
Social hierarchy: king → priests → warriors → artisans → farmers → slaves.
Timber houses on raised earth platforms — homes built up high stayed dry in floods and kept people safe. Clan-based villages.
Trade
Used cowrie shells as currency; traded bronze, jade, and silk were traded across long distances on the silk road.
Religious beliefs and practices
Ancestor worship and bronze ding vessels.
Oracle-bone inscriptions.
Writing and other inventions
Bronze casting.
Chariots with spoked wheels and yokes Silk weaving and hemp textiles.
COMPARATIVE STUDY: THE ELIZABETHAN AND VICTORIAN AGES
The Elizabethan age
Life for different groups in society
Nobility and gentry, merchants, farmers, labourers, and beggars and destitute. Role of women.
Children: education mostly for boys of higher status; many worked from young age. Around 30% of boys and 10% of girls learnt to read.
Monarch’s power versus power of Parliament or the people
Elizabeth I ruled England from 1558 to 1603.
Government: The monarch seen as the main ruler, an ‘absolute monarch’, with ‘government’ meaning the queen and her officials.
Parliament as a group of powerful men who helped make laws and grant taxes and did not represent ordinary people. Parliament’s limited power to challenge the queen. Most people had no say in choosing its members.
Religion
Protestant religious rules and practices. How they were enforced across England and the treatment of people who continued to follow Catholic beliefs.
Trade and exploration and changes in buildings, technology, or inventions and culture
Growth of exploration and overseas ventures and privateering, including links with the Americas and Africa.
Invention of the printing press in 1485. Growth of printing. Influence of Renaissance and works of William Shakespeare.
The Victorian age
Life for different groups in British society
Features of upper, middle, and working classes and underclass of destitute. Role of women.
Children: some worked in harsh conditions; access to schooling improved. By the end of Victoria’s reign, nearly the entire population could read and write.
Steady rise in average wages across the population during Queen Victoria’s reign, with more jobs and greater availability of everyday goods in shops (e.g. soap, matches, clothes, newspapers, toys).
Monarch’s power versus power of Parliament or the people
Queen Victoria was monarch of the United Kingdom from 1837 to 1901.
Queen Victoria did not have a role in daily decisions of government. Limited political power in a constitutional monarchy, with decisions made by elected government.
Government as prime minister and cabinet now drawn from the majority grouping of members of Parliament (MPs) in Parliament. Parliament still made up of the House of Lords and House of Commons.
Expanding voting rights, although working-class people remained excluded for much of the reign. No women could vote.
Religion
Largely Christian society with emergence of scientific challenge (e.g. Darwin’s theory of evolution).
Trade and exploration and changes in buildings, technology, and inventions
Expansion of global empire and trade networks, with links to Africa, Asia, and Oceania, including New Zealand.
Technological innovation, such as the telegraph, photography, gas lighting, and public sanitation systems. Rapid industrialisation.
For example, consider:
what Athens and other Greek city states had in common
similarities and differences in the role played by religion in society between the two periods
the sources we use to find out about Ancient Greece and why it is sometimes difficult to be certain about how people lived at the time
how the Ancient Greek civilisation was similar to and different from the Egyptian civilisation
the historical significance of Ancient Greece in shaping the modern world
For example, consider:
the differences between the different dynasties
the sources we can use to find out about the Chinese religious beliefs and their societal impact
the differences between the dynastic rule and other societal structures
the societal impact of the Silk Road
the historical significance of dynastic China in shaping the modern world
For example, consider:
the similarities and differences in the monarch’s power versus the power of Parliament and the people between the two periods
how life varied for different groups in Elizabethan and Victorian society
the different types of trade and extent of exploration between the two periods
ROME FROM REPUBLIC TO EMPIRE
Where and when?
Rome and its Empire: extent over time, including in Britain.
Government and society: The Roman Republic:
Structure of Roman society.
What is meant by a republic and how power was held and exercised in the Roman Republic.
Roman laws.
Roman army: training, armour, legions, what made them strong.
Roman emperors and how they ruled the Roman Empire
Why Rome stopped being a republic.
How rule by an emperor was different from rule by Senate in the Republic.
Roman religion
Roman gods and goddesses.
Festivals and temples (e.g. Saturnalia).
Roads, cities, and everyday life
Roman roads, baths, aqueducts, temples, forums.
Clothing, food, entertainment (gladiators, theatre).
The role of slaves in Roman society.
For example, consider:
the differences between monarchical rule (e.g. Egyptian Pharaohs or Roman kings) and the Roman Republic
the reasons why the Roman Republic ended
the similarities and differences between Roman religion and beliefs in Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece
the sources we can use to find out about Romans’ religious beliefs
the historical significance of the Roman Empire in shaping the modern world.
Civics and Society
Knowledge
The facts, concepts, principles, and theories to teach.
Practices
The skills, strategies, and applications to teach.
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
DEMOCRACY
Democracy is a system in which citizens choose leaders through elections. It can be contrasted with other forms of government, such as monarchy (inherited rule by a king or queen) and dictatorship (rule by one individual).
Value of democracy in ensuring fairness, equality, citizen voice, and peaceful leadership change.
There are three-yearly general elections for the House of Representatives in New Zealand.
House of Representatives as law-making body of New Zealand.
Government formation by the party or coalition holding majority support in Parliament.
The Prime Minister is the head of government, leading the Cabinet of ministers.
The Government is the central team making decisions on core government responsibilities such as schools, hospitals, roads, and public safety and deciding public spending.
Local councils are elected by the community to make our towns and cities better places to live. They look after things like:
parks and playgrounds
libraries and swimming pools
rubbish and recycling
roads and footpaths
planning where buildings like houses can be built.
Impact of Ancient Greek political ideas on New Zealand’s democracy
Voting for leaders: first election in 1853 in which people chose leaders, like in Ancient Greece.
Making rules together: Parliament, in which groups met to make laws, began in 1854. Māori and European settlers talked before the Constitution was written (they had meetings to decide how New Zealand should be run), like Greek councils.
Democratic principles of ensuring fairness, equality, and citizen voice.
Civic participation and contribution can be increased through:
volunteering at school or in the community
joining youth councils or school leadership groups
attending hui or public meetings
giving feedback in community consultations
taking part in local projects or fundraising for good causes.
LAWS AND THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM
Governments develop laws for a range of purposes, such as to prevent harm, protect wellbeing, and maintain order. Laws are legally binding rules that everyone in the country must follow.
National laws, such as traffic rules (e.g. driving on the left, seat-belt requirements).
Local bylaws, such as noise limits in residential areas or pet control requirements (e.g. leashes, dog-exercise areas).
Our community rules for safety and fairness (e.g. school rules).
Rule of law
Everyone is treated equally under the law.
Protection of individuals and property.
Basis for a community with reliable safeguards, fostering orderly and peaceful functioning.
Court system
Courts help make sure laws are followed and fair decisions are made based on those laws.
In cases where someone is found guilty of breaking the law, courts can give punishments such as fines, community service, or time in prison.
Courts also help solve disagreements between people and protect individual rights.
Part of the role of the courts is to ensure justice is done.
Judges are neutral decision-makers, interpreting laws and ensuring fair outcomes.
Police services
Law enforcement, crime investigation, and crime prevention.
Emergency response and personal safety via 111.
Traffic control and road-safety education.
School Community Officers support safe learning environments.
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Legal foundations of rights in New Zealand
New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990: Protects rights such as freedom of speech, belief, and peaceful protest.
Human Rights Act 1993: Protects people from unfair discrimination.
Electoral Act 1993: Defines voting rights and how elections work.
Te Tiriti o Waitangi | the Treaty of Waitangi are foundational documents that inform the rights and responsibilities of individuals and institutions in New Zealand.
Tangata whenua and tangata Tiriti are partners in a bicultural society.
International agreements (e.g. Universal Declaration of Human Rights) shape New Zealand’s commitment to global human rights.
Core responsibilities of citizenship
Obeying New Zealand’s laws to help keep society fair and safe.
Enrolling to vote when eligible.
Paying taxes to support services like hospitals, schools, and transport.
Respecting the rights and freedoms of others.
Acting in ways that support the wellbeing of the community and country.
Using trustworthy sources, understanding different viewpoints, and thinking critically about news and information.
Importance of shared responsibility
Responsibilities help people live together peacefully. They build trust and cooperation between people.
They protect everyone’s rights. When people do their part, everyone benefits.
Without shared responsibility, society can become unfair or unsafe.
Having rights also means doing your part to help others enjoy theirs.
Informed citizens are needed to participate in democracy.
how information can be collected about the ways people in the school community and local community volunteer their time
how to engage in dialogue about the core ideas of democracy, fairness, and equality in relation to a current or local issue
how to participate in a full experience of a voting process
how information can be collected about laws and by-laws that need to be followed on the journey to and from school and considering why those laws are in place and how they might need to change
the role of police in keeping people safe, investigating crime, and responding to emergencies
how to survey and seek a range of viewpoints on a current or proposed law
what makes for a good rule and a good law and considering why people may have different perspectives
examples of rights and responsibilities and how these apply to them in everyday life
engaging in dialogue about why rights and responsibilities matter for keeping society fair, safe, and cooperative
how the significance of a key law that protects rights in New Zealand (e.g. Human Rights Act) can be assessed using a case study
how international agreements (e.g. UN Declaration of Human Rights) influence New Zealand’s approach to human rights
the responsibilities of citizenship, including obeying laws, voting, paying taxes, and respecting others then develop a campaign and associated materials for raising awareness of the rights and responsibilities of citizens in New Zealand
Geography
Knowledge
The facts, concepts, principles, and theories to teach.
Practices
The skills, strategies, and applications to teach.
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
POPULATION CHANGE IN NEW ZEALAND
Population growth and structure
Steady growth of New Zealand’s population over the last two centuries.
Changes in population structure, including an ageing population.
Declining death rates due to improved medical knowledge, healthcare access, and lifestyle changes.
Migration and population change
Division of New Zealand into 16 regions.
Migration is a factor affecting population size and structure.
Push factors such as war, disasters, and lack of opportunities.
Pull factors such as work opportunities, culture, and education.
Multicultural population results from migration by different groups.
Population distribution
Population density as a measure of people living in an area.
Low population density in New Zealand, especially on the South Island.
Global comparisons
New Zealand compared to places with high growth rates, high rates of migration, and high population density.
IMPACTS OF TECTONIC HAZARDS
Plate movement and earthquakes
Movement of Earth’s plates into, away from, or past each other.
Earthquakes are caused by pressure building and releasing along plate boundaries.
Ground shaking can lead to building damage, collapses, landslides, and rockfalls.
Earthquake risk known in some areas, but timing cannot be predicted.
Earthquake preparation through building design and civil defence planning.
Earthquake planning requiring funding and organisation.
Earthquakes can cause tsunamis.
Volcanoes and eruptions
Volcano formation from magma reaching the surface as lava.
Variation in eruption strength and lava viscosity.
Less explosive eruptions producing flowing lava.
More explosive eruptions releasing ash and volcanic bombs.
Volcano prediction through monitoring tremors, land distortion, and temperature changes.
Eruption impacts include evacuation, damage to farmland and buildings, injury, or death.
Emergency preparedness for tectonic hazards
Families and communities should have strategies for preparing for tectonic hazards, such as:
Drop, Cover and Hold
tsunami evacuation zone
emergency mobile alerts
a household emergency kit.
Financial aid and humanitarian assistance provided by individuals and communities.
URBANISATION
Urbanisation and city growth
Urbanisation is the process of more people living in cities.
Growth of megacities as a result of urbanisation.
Urban living has been the norm in high-income countries since the mid-19th century.
Rapid urban growth in low- and middle-income countries.
Challenges of urbanisation
Economic, social, and environmental problems caused by rapid urban growth.
Informal settlements in low- and middle-income countries with specific challenges.
Urbanisation in New Zealand
City growth during the 19th and 20th centuries.
Influence of European settler culture on city development.
Impact of urbanisation and migration on population diversity.
Urbanisation and being Māori
Mid-20th century Māori migration to New Zealand cities occurred at an unprecedented pace and scale, disrupting the whakapapa of te reo Māori and tikanga and depopulating papa kāinga.
New approaches to being Māori and retaining iwi values and practices were created and debated. Movements to reassert Māori language, culture, and identity arose throughout the country, including:
cultural groups (e.g. Ngāti Pōneke Young Māori Club, Te Waka Huia)
political groups (e.g. Ngā Tamatoa)
tribal affiliate groups in cities (e.g. Tūhoe in Auckland, Wellington, and Hamilton; Waikato ki Roto o Pōneke)
urban, pan-tribal marae (e.g. Hoani Waititi, Ngā Hau e Whā)
educational movements (e.g. kōhanga reo, kura kaupapa Māori, wānanga).
how natural increase in population can be calculated
similarities and differences of different ways of showing population density (maps, pie charts, 3D models, interactive graphics)
how diagrams can be used to demonstrate the impact of plate movement on the creation of hazards
how tectonic processes have created land and hazards
how buildings can be designed to withstand earthquakes
how to interpret data on the relative magnitude of earthquakes and the associated hazards
how the features of explosive and effusive volcanic eruptions can be categorised
why earthquakes and volcanoes are managed in different ways
how to interpret a range of data to analyse how a named area was affected by tectonic hazards
how trends can be analysed using visual geographic data displaying the percentage of urban population
how the percentage change in the urban population can be calculated by analysing population data
how aerial photographs and historic maps can be used to chart the way that cities have grown and changed over time
how photographs, aerial photographs, and first-hand testimony can be used to identify the challenges of living in informal settlements
the characteristics of New Zealand’s cities
LANDSCAPE FORMATION
Plate tectonics and mountain formation
The Earth’s crust is made of large plates, moving slowly.
Increasing temperature with depth inside the Earth.
Mountain formation from plate collisions, including the creation of the Southern Alps 25 million years ago.
Evidence of plate movement in mountain ranges, species distribution, and coastline patterns.
Rock types and the rock cycle
Sedimentary rock formed from compressed particles of other rocks (e.g. limestone).
Igneous rock formed from cooled lava or magma (e.g. pumice, granite).
Metamorphic rock formed from heat and pressure on other rocks (e.g. pounamu).
Transformation of rock through the rock cycle.
Influence of rock type on landscape formation through different erosion rates.
Landscape shaping processes
Erosion by rivers, ice, and waves shaping the land.
Zealandia is a mostly submerged continent.
Formation of New Zealand from tectonic uplift 23 million years ago.
Creation of mountains, volcanoes, and earthquakes by the Pacific Plate and Australian Plate.
Case study: Local landscape
Physical appearance of the landscape.
Geological processes that created the landscape.
Rock types and geological features.
Future changes to the landscape.
TEMPERATE AND TROPICAL RAINFOREST BIOMES
New Zealand has large areas of very rare temperate rainforest.
Temperate rainforest grows because westerly wind picks up moist air from across the ocean. The air rises over the mountains, cools, and turns into rains. This combines with mild temperatures to create good growing conditions.
The location of the world’s major rainforest areas, including those in South America, West Africa, and South Asia.
Biomes are global-scale ecosystems. They have shared characteristics wherever they are in the world.
Tropical rainforest biomes are found either side of the equator, where there are high levels of sunlight and rainfall, allowing rapid tree growth.
Rainforests have high levels of biodiversity.
Plants in a rainforest
Trees grow towards the sunlight. This creates distinct layers: emergent, canopy, under canopy, and the forest floor.
Plants adapt to rainforest conditions.
Competition for light means that plants try to grow as tall as they can, as quickly as they can, or they climb up other plants or grow directly on their branches.
The soil in the rainforest has few nutrients, so trees have shallow roots to get nutrients from plant material as soon as it decomposes.
Human interactions
Many people make their lives in rainforests. Some of these are Indigenous peoples who have maintained their traditional way of life.
Deforestation leads to large areas of rainforest being cleared and threatens ecosystems and the way of life of Indigenous peoples.
Most deforestation takes place due to settlements, to raise cattle, or to grow crops such as palm, rubber, or coffee.
Deforestation can also change the local and global climate.
CLIMATE PATTERNS
People interact with and use places, resources, and environments for personal, social, cultural, and economic reasons.
Changes people make to places can have long-term environmental impacts on those places, the people who live there, and global processes.
Values and connection to place affect their sense of responsibility for environmental sustainability.
Greenhouse effect
Past climate changes, including glacial and inter-glacial periods.
Greenhouse effect as the atmosphere storing and reflecting heat from the Sun.
Current climate warming caused by human actions changing the atmosphere.
Greenhouse gases trapping heat and causing global warming.
Land degradation in dry and how areas means land is less productive.
Impacts of climate change
Disruption of weather patterns, with heavy rain in some places and less rain in others.
Melting glaciers and warming oceans leading to sea-level rise.
Regional impacts in New Zealand and the Pacific
Rising temperatures reducing snowfall in alpine areas.
Rising sea levels threatening homes and Māori coastal marae.
Increasing frequency and strength of cyclones.
Risk of submersion and climate displacement in Pacific nations such as Tuvalu.
Responses to climate change
Mitigation through global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Adaptation through preparation for climate change impacts.
how diagrams demonstrate the formation of landforms
how tectonics will continue to cause the landscape to change in the future
observations about different types of rocks can be collected and recorded
how to interpret aerial photographs and maps to identify different landscapes
how to interpret geological maps
how the erosion of rock shapes the land
how to interpret maps of biomes to identify patterns in the location of tropical rainforests
diagrams can be used to identify the structure of the rainforest
how plant adaptations match the environmental conditions
how secondary data (such as on aerial photographs) on rainforest clearance can be collected and analysed using aerial photographs and simple graphs
the connection between economic development and deforestation
how deforestation changes the environment
how to interpret line graphs showing global temperature changes at a range of time scales
how to interpret graphs to identify the correlation between rising greenhouse gas concentration and rising global temperatures
a range of data can be used to evaluate attempts to manage climate change through both mitigation and adaptation
the impacts of climate change on people and the environment and how impacts can be categorised as economic, social, and environmental
REGIONAL COMPARISON: WHAT IS LIFE LIKE IN SOUTHEAST ASIA?
Environmental characteristics
Environmental regions (biomes) are defined by climate, vegetation, and landforms such as deserts, rainforests, tundra, and grasslands.
Tropical climate caused by the equator running through Southeast Asia, with high temperatures and heavy rainfall.
Tropical rainforests as the dominant ecosystem.
Mountains and frequent volcanic eruptions and earthquakes caused by tectonic processes.
Regional identity
A region is an area with shared characteristics and internal differences.
Southeast Asia is made up of 11 countries: Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar (Burma), Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste (East Timor), and Vietnam.
Cultural diversity, with over 1,200 languages spoken.
Economic activity
Mixed levels of economic development and activity across the region.
Agriculture and manufacturing as key parts of the economy.
Goods produced in Southeast Asia sold in other countries such as New Zealand.
Case study of one country
Location of the country.
Main economic activities.
Cultural practices.
Connection between human and physical geography.
For example, consider:
how longitude and latitude can be used to describe a location
how maps can show the way biomes are distributed
why it is hotter at the equator than the poles
how a range of geographical information (photographs, maps, simple graphs) can be interpreted to describe the culture of one country
Economic Activity
Knowledge
The facts, concepts, principles, and theories to teach.
Practices
The skills, strategies, and applications to teach.
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
During Year 4
During Year 5
During Year 6
Financial Education
Goods and services we buy have different prices.
People have different feelings and experiences about money.
People have limited money and have to make decisions about what to buy. Buying something often involves choosing between different items based on how much money people have.
When buying, people can shop around to see if they can get the same thing, or similar, at a cheaper price. Cheaper prices do not always mean better value for money.
There are different ways to keep money safe (e.g. bank accounts).
People and organisations work to provide goods and services in different ways (e.g. marketplaces, volunteering, online shops, subscriptions).
Needs and wants can be met through exchanging money and other resources (e.g. time, skills, goods) for goods (e.g. food, clothes, toys) and services (e.g. haircuts, dentistry, house painting).
People can store money or buy goods and services with notes and coins or with cards and through banks.
When people have the option of storing money or buying, they need to consider both their immediate needs and their long-term wants.
People can save money in different ways.
Banks provide financial services (e.g. bank accounts) to people.
People do different kinds of work to help others and/or to earn money. Work can include producing goods or providing services that help people in the community and can be influenced by people’s values (e.g. sustainability, providing employment, providing for family).
Forms of exchange (e.g. barter, credit) have changed over time (e.g. minting coins, electronic), while money has enduring characteristics (e.g. portability, durability).
Early trade routes like the Silk Road enabled the exchange of goods, ideas, and money over vast distances. Establishing trade connections between societies laid foundations for global trade systems used today (see History Year 5).
Businesses earn money generally by making sales of goods and services. This is called income or revenue.
Businesses have different costs that they must cover in order to make their goods and services.
Profit is generally calculated as income (or revenue) minus costs.
People’s values and organisations’ pūtake sometimes underpin different forms of business, innovation, and enterprise (e.g. local business, Māori enterprises, social initiatives).
Pūtake is an organisation’s reason for being and is shaped by the organisation’s values and beliefs (e.g. kaitiakitanga, providing employment, responding to a market opportunity).
Credit involves borrowing money to buy goods and services. People sometimes use credit to purchase goods and services, which can put people in debt.
Debt is the amount of money you owe — an obligation to repay money, normally at specified times and amounts (e.g. credit cards, bank loans, mortgages).
People can get into financial problems with too much debt.
Budgets can be used to help people and organisations make financial decisions.
Specialisation means people and communities focus on making or providing one type of good or service well (e.g. farming, building, baking bread). It means people and communities must trade and exchange in a market economy.
Making a shopping list and comparing prices at different places, then calculating the total price of a number of goods on the list
Identifying examples of goods and services in daily life (e.g. at home, at school, in the local community) and describing how people get goods and services in different ways (e.g. buying, swapping, sharing)
Examining how people can open and use bank accounts
Creating a savings plan with a target amount
Comparing different kinds of work people do to help others or earn money, including making goods or providing services
Identifying reasons that influence the type of work people do
Identifying how trade and exchange has changed over time, such as across regions and cultures with the expansion of trade routes and development of physical currency
Considering a case study of one business, such as making a budget for a small business for the school to raise money (e.g. bake sale), identifying potential costs, pricing, and revenue and examining how this may differ with different businesses
Identifying how people’s values and organisations’ pūtake influence different forms of business, innovation, and enterprise
Identifying different examples of specialisation and exchange in the local community, drawing connections between local industry and enterprise and how people in the community work and earn income
Links to Social Sciences supports and resources:
Infosheet – Social Sciences Learning Area Years 0–10
File Downloads
No files available for download.